{"id": "10963", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10963", "title": "Forgetting", "text": "Loss or modification of information encoded in an individual's memory\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nForgetting or disremembering is the apparent loss or modification of information already encoded and stored in an individual's short or long-term memory. It is a spontaneous or gradual process in which old memories are unable to be recalled from memory storage. Problems with remembering, learning and retaining new information are a few of the most common complaints of older adults. \nStudies show that retention improves with increased rehearsal. This improvement occurs because rehearsal helps to transfer information into long-term memory.\nForgetting curves (amount remembered as a function of time since an event was first experienced) have been extensively analyzed. The most recent evidence suggests that a power function provides the closest mathematical fit to the forgetting function.\nOverview.\nFailing to retrieve an event does not mean that this specific event has been forever forgotten. Research has shown that there are a few health behaviors that to some extent can prevent forgetting from happening so often. One of the simplest ways to keep the brain healthy and prevent forgetting is to stay active and exercise. Staying active is important because overall it keeps the body healthy. When the body is healthy the brain is healthy and less inflamed as well. Older adults who were more active were found to have had less episodes of forgetting compared to those older adults who were less active. A healthy diet can also contribute to a healthier brain and aging process which in turn results in less frequent forgetting.\nHistory.\nOne of the first to study the mechanisms of forgetting was the German psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus (1885). Using himself as the sole subject in his experiment, he memorized lists of three letter nonsense syllable words\u2014two consonants and one vowel in the middle. He then measured his own capacity to relearn a given list of words after a variety of given time period. He found that forgetting occurs in a systematic manner, beginning rapidly and then leveling off. Although his methods were primitive, his basic premises have held true today and have been reaffirmed by more methodologically sound methods. The Ebbinghaus \"forgetting curve\" is the name of his results which he plotted out and made 2 conclusions. The first being that much of what we forget is lost soon after it is originally learned. The second being that the amount of forgetting eventually levels off.\nAround the same time Ebbinghaus developed the forgetting curve, psychologist Sigmund Freud theorized that people intentionally forgot things in order to push bad thoughts and feelings deep into their unconscious, a process he called \"repression\".\nThere is debate as to whether (or how often) memory repression really occurs and mainstream psychology holds that true memory repression occurs only very rarely.\nOne process model for memory was proposed by Richard Atkinson and Richard Shiffrin in the 1960s as a way to explain the operation of memory. This modal model of memory, also known as the Atkinson-Shiffrin model of memory, suggests there are three types of memory: sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory. Each type of memory is separate in its capacity and duration. In the modal model, how quickly information is forgotten is related to the type of memory where that information is stored. Information in the first stage, sensory memory, is forgotten after only a few seconds. In the second stage, short-term memory, information is forgotten after about 20 years. While information in long-term memory can be remembered for minutes or even decades, it may be forgotten when the retrieval processes for that information fail.\nConcerning unwanted memories, modern terminology divides motivated forgetting into unconscious repression (which is disputed) and conscious thought suppression.\nMeasurements.\nForgetting can be measured in different ways all of which are based on recall:\nRecall.\nFor this type of measurement, a participant has to identify material that was previously learned. The participant is asked to remember a list of material. Later on they are shown the same list of material with additional information and they are asked to identify the material that was on the original list. The more they recognize, the less information is forgotten.\nFree recall and variants.\nFree recall is a basic paradigm used to study human memory. In a free recall task, a subject is presented a list of to-be-remembered items, one at a time. For example, an experimenter might read a list of 20 words aloud, presenting a new word to the subject every 4 seconds. At the end of the presentation of the list, the subject is asked to recall the items (e.g., by writing down as many items from the list as possible). It is called a free recall task because the subject is free to recall the items in any order that he or she desires.\nPrompted (cued) recall.\nPrompted recall is a slight variation of free recall that consists of presenting hints or prompts to increase the likelihood that the behavior will be produced. Usually these prompts are stimuli that were not there during the training period. Thus in order to measure the degree of forgetting, one can see how many prompts the subject misses or the number of prompts required to produce the behavior.\nRelearning method.\nThis method measures forgetting by the amount of training required to reach the previous level of performance. German psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus (1885) used this method on himself. He memorized lists of nonsensical syllables until he could repeat the list two times without error. After a certain interval, he relearned the list and saw how long it would take him to do this task. If it took fewer times, then there had been less forgetting. His experiment was one of the first to study forgetting.\nRecognition.\nParticipants are given a list of words and that they have to remember. Then they are shown the same list of material with additional information and they are asked to identify the material that was on the original list. The more they recognize, the less information is forgotten.\nTheories.\nThe four main theories of forgetting apparent in the study of psychology are as follows:\nCue-dependent forgetting.\nCue-dependent forgetting (also, context-dependent forgetting) or retrieval failure, is the failure to recall a memory due to missing stimuli or cues that were present at the time the memory was encoded. Encoding is the first step in creating and remembering a memory. How well something has been encoded in the memory can be measured by completing specific tests of retrieval. Examples of these tests would be explicit ones like cued recall or implicit tests like word fragment completion. Cue-dependent forgetting is one of five cognitive psychology theories of forgetting. This theory states that a memory is sometimes temporarily forgotten purely because it cannot be retrieved, but the proper cue can bring it to mind. A good metaphor for this is searching for a book in a library without the reference number, title, author or even subject. The information still exists, but without these cues retrieval is unlikely. Furthermore, a good retrieval cue must be consistent with the original encoding of the information. If the sound of the word is emphasized during the encoding process, the cue that should be used should also put emphasis on the phonetic quality of the word. Information is available however, just not readily available without these cues. Depending on the age of a person, retrieval cues and skills may not work as well. This is usually common in older adults but that is not always the case. When information is encoded into the memory and retrieved with a technique called spaced retrieval, this helps older adults retrieve the events stored in the memory better. There is also evidence from different studies that show age related changes in memory. These specific studies have shown that episodic memory performance does in fact decline with age and have made known that older adults produce vivid rates of forgetting when two items are combined and not encoded.\nOrganic causes.\nForgetting that occurs through physiological damage or dilapidation to the brain are referred to as organic causes of forgetting. These theories encompass the loss of information already retained in long-term memory or the inability to encode new information again. Examples include Alzheimer's, amnesia, dementia, consolidation theory and the gradual slowing down of the central nervous system due to aging.\nInterference theories.\nInterference theory refers to the idea that when the learning of something new causes forgetting of older material on the basis of competition between the two. This essentially states that memory's information may become confused or combined with other information during encoding, resulting in the distortion or disruption of memories. In nature, the interfering items are said to originate from an overstimulating environment. Interference theory exists in three branches: Proactive, Retroactive and Output. Retroactive and Proactive inhibition each referring in contrast to the other. Retroactive interference is when new information (memories) interferes with older information. On the other hand, proactive interference is when old information interferes with the retrieval of new information. This is sometimes thought to occur especially when memories are similar. Output Interference occurs when the initial act of recalling specific information interferes with the retrieval of the original information. Another reason why retrieval failure occurs is due to encoding failure. The information never made it to long-term memory storage. According to the level of processing theory, how well information is encoded depends on the level of processing a piece of information receives. Certain parts of information are better encoded than others; for example, information this visual imagery or that has a survival value is more easily transferred to the long-term memory storage. This theory shows a contradiction: an extremely intelligent individual is expected to forget more hastily than one who has a slow mentality. For this reason, an intelligent individual has stored up more memory in his mind which will cause interferences and impair their ability to recall specific information. Based on current research, testing interference has only been carried out by recalling from a list of words rather than using situation from daily lives, thus it is hard to generalize the findings for this theory.\nIt has been found that interference related tasks decreased memory performance by up to 20%, with negative effects at all interference time points and large variability between participants concerning both the time point and the size of maximal interference. Furthermore, fast learners seem to be more affected by interference than slow learners. People are also less likely to recall items when intervening stimuli are presented within the first ten minutes after learning. Recall performance is better without interference. Peripheral processes such as encoding time, recognition memory and motor execution decline with age. However proactive interference is similar. Suggesting contrary to earlier reports that the inhibitory processes observed with this paradigm remain intact in older adults.\nTrace decay theory.\nDecay theory states that when something new is learned, a neurochemical, physical \"memory trace\" is formed in the brain and over time this trace tends to disintegrate, unless it is occasionally used. Decay theory states the reason we eventually forget something or an event is because the memory of it fades with time. If we do not attempt to look back at an event, the greater the interval time between the time when the event from happening and the time when we try to remember, the memory will start to fade. Time is the greatest impact in remembering an event.\nTrace decay theory explains memories that are stored in both short-term and long-term memory system, and assumes that the memories leave a trace in the brain. According to this theory, short-term memory (STM) can only retain information for a limited amount of time, around 15 to 30 seconds unless it is rehearsed. If it is not rehearsed, the information will start to gradually fade away and decay. Donald Hebb proposed that incoming information causes a series of neurons to create a neurological memory trace in the brain which would result in change in the morphological and/or chemical changes in the brain and would fade with time. Repeated firing causes a structural change in the synapses. Rehearsal of repeated firing maintains the memory in STM until a structural change is made. Therefore, forgetting happens as a result of automatic decay of the memory trace in brain. This theory states that the events between learning and recall have no effects on recall; the important factor that affects is the duration that the information has been retained. Hence, as longer time passes more of traces are subject to decay and as a result the information is forgotten.\nOne major problem about this theory is that in real-life situation, the time between encoding a piece of information and recalling it, is going to be filled with all different kinds of events that might happen to the individual. Therefore, it is difficult to conclude that forgetting is a result of only the time duration. It is also important to consider the effectiveness of this theory. Although it seems very plausible, it is about impossible to test. It is difficult to create a situation where there is a blank period of time between presenting the material and recalling it later.\nThis theory is supposedly contradicted by the fact that one is able to ride a bike even after not having done so for decades. \"Flashbulb memories\" are another piece of seemingly contradicting evidence. It is believed that certain memories \"trace decay\" while others do not. Sleep is believed to play a key role in halting trace decay, although the exact mechanism of this is unknown.\nPhysical and chemical changes in our brain lead to a memory trace, and this is based on the idea of the trace theory of memory. Information that gets into our short-term memory lasts a few seconds (15\u201320 seconds), and it fades away if it is not rehearsed or practiced as the neurochemical memory trace disappears rapidly. According to the trace decay theory of forgetting, what occurs between the creation of new memories and the recall of these memories is not influenced by the recall. However, the time between these events (memory formation and recalling) decides whether the information can be kept or forgotten. As there is an inverse correlation that if the time is short, more information can be recalled. On the other hand, if the time is long less information can be recalled or more information will be forgotten. This theory can be criticized for not sharing ideas on how some memories can stay and others can fade, though there was a long time between the formation and recall. Newness to something plays a crucial role in this situation. For instance, people are more likely to recall their very first day abroad than all of the intervening days between it and living there. Emotions also play a crucial role in this situation.\nImpairments and lack of forgetting.\nForgetting can have very different causes than simply removal of stored content. Forgetting can mean access problems, availability problems, or can have other reasons such as amnesia caused by an accident.\nAn inability to forget can cause distress, as with post-traumatic stress disorder and hyperthymesia (in which people have an extremely detailed autobiographical memory).\nSocial forgetting.\nPsychologists have called attention to \"social aspects of forgetting\". Though often loosely defined, social amnesia is generally considered to be the opposite of collective memory. \"Social amnesia\" was first discussed by Russell Jacoby, yet his use of the term was restricted to a narrow approach, which was limited to what he perceived to be a relative neglect of psychoanalytical theory in psychology. The cultural historian Peter Burke suggested that \"it may be worth investigating the social organization of forgetting, the rules of exclusion, suppression or repression, and the question of who wants whom to forget what\". In an in-depth historical study spanning two centuries, Guy Beiner proposed the term \"social forgetting\", which he distinguished from crude notions of \"collective amnesia\" and \"total oblivion\", arguing that \"social forgetting is to be found in the interface of public silence and more private remembrance\". The philosopher Walter Benjamin sees social forgetting closely linked to the question of present-day interests, arguing that \"every image of the past that is not recognized by the present as one of its own concerns threatens to disappear irretrievably\". Building on this, the sociologist David Leupold argued in the context of competing national narratives that what is suppressed and forgotten in one national narrative \"might appear at the core of past narrations by the other\" - thus often leading to diametrically opposed, mutually exclusive accounts on the past.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10964", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10964", "title": "Radical (Chemistry II)", "text": ""}
{"id": "10965", "revid": "21172487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10965", "title": "Fay Wray", "text": "American actress (1907\u20132004)\nVina Fay Wray (September 15, 1907 \u2013 August 8, 2004) was a Canadian-American actress best known for starring as Ann Darrow in the 1933 film \"King Kong\". Through an acting career that spanned nearly six decades, Wray attained international recognition as an actress in horror films. She has been dubbed the first \"scream queen\".\nShe had minor film roles, and gained media attention as one of the \"WAMPAS Baby Stars\" in 1926. This led to her contract with Paramount Pictures as a teenager, where she made more than a dozen feature films. After leaving Paramount, she signed deals with various film companies, got her first roles in horror films and many other types, including in \"The Bowery\" (1933) and \"Viva Villa!\" (1934), both of which star Wallace Beery. For RKO Radio Pictures, Inc., Wray starred in her most identifiable film, \"King Kong\" (1933). After its success, she had numerous roles in film and television, retiring in 1980.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nWray was born on a ranch near Cardston, Alberta, to parents who were members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: Elvina Marguerite Jones from Salt Lake City, Utah, and Joseph Heber Wray from Kingston upon Hull, England. They had six children and she was a granddaughter of LDS pioneer Daniel Webster Jones. Her ancestors came from England, Scotland, Ireland, Northern Ireland, and Wales.\nHer family returned to the United States a few years after she was born; they moved to Salt Lake City in 1912 and moved to Lark, Utah, in 1914. In 1919, the Wray family returned to Salt Lake City, and then relocated to Hollywood, where she attended Hollywood High School.\nEarly acting career.\nIn 1923, Wray appeared in her first film at the age of 16, when she landed a role in a short historical film sponsored by a local newspaper. In the 1920s, Wray appeared in the silent film \"The Coast Patrol\" (1925), and uncredited bit parts at the Hal Roach Studios.\nIn 1926, the Western Association of Motion Picture Advertisers selected Wray as one of the \"WAMPAS Baby Stars\", a group of women whom they believed to be on the threshold of movie stardom. She was at the time under contract to Universal Studios, mostly co-starring in low-budget Westerns opposite Buck Jones.\nThe following year, Wray was signed to a contract with Paramount Pictures. In 1926, director Erich von Stroheim cast her as the main female lead in his film \"The Wedding March\", released by Paramount two years later. The film was noted for its high budget and production values, but was a financial failure. It also gave Wray her first lead role. Wray stayed with Paramount to make more than a dozen films and made the transition from silent films to \"talkies\".\nHorror films and \"King Kong\".\nAfter leaving Paramount, Wray signed with other film studios. Under these deals, Wray was cast in several horror films, including \"Doctor X\" (1932) and \"Mystery of the Wax Museum\" (1933). Her best known films were produced under her deal with RKO Radio Pictures. Her first film with RKO was \"The Most Dangerous Game\" (1932), co-starring Joel McCrea. The production was filmed at night on the same jungle sets used for \"King Kong\" during the day, and with Wray and Robert Armstrong starring in both movies.\n\"The Most Dangerous Game\" was followed by the release of Wray's best-remembered film, \"King Kong\". According to Wray, Jean Harlow had been RKO's original choice, but because MGM put Harlow under exclusive contract during the pre-production phase of the film, she became unavailable. Wray was approached by director Merian C. Cooper to play King Kong's blonde captive, Ann Darrow, for which she was paid US$. The film was a commercial success and Wray was reportedly proud that it saved RKO from bankruptcy.\nLater career.\nWray continued starring in films, including \"The Richest Girl in the World\", but by the early 1940s, her appearances became less frequent. She retired in 1942 after her second marriage but due to financial exigencies she soon resumed her acting career, and over the next three decades, she appeared in several films and appeared frequently on television. She portrayed Catherine Morrison in the 1953\u201354 sitcom \"The Pride of the Family\" with Natalie Wood as her daughter. Wray appeared in \"Queen Bee\" and \"The Cobweb\", both released in 1955.\nWray appeared in three episodes of \"Perry Mason\": \"The Case of the Prodigal Parent\" (1958); \"The Case of the Watery Witness\" (1959), as murder victim Lorna Thomas; and \"The Case of the Fatal Fetish\" (1965), as voodoo practitioner Mignon Germaine. Wray also co-starred with \"Perry Mason\" star Raymond Burr in the 1957 noir film release \"Crime of Passion\".\nIn 1959, Wray was cast as Tula Marsh in the episode \"The Second Happiest Day\" of \"Playhouse 90.\" Other roles around this time were in the episodes \"Dip in the Pool\" (1958) and \"The Morning After\" of CBS's \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\". In 1960, she appeared as Clara in an episode of \"77 Sunset Strip\", \"Who Killed Cock Robin?\" Another 1960 role was that of Mrs. Staunton, with Gigi Perreau as her daughter, in the episode \"Flight from Terror\" of \"The Islanders.\"\nWray appeared in a 1961 episode of \"The Real McCoys\" titled \"Theatre in the Barn\". In 1963, she played Mrs. Brubaker in \"The Eleventh Hour\" episode \"You're So Smart, Why Can't You Be Good?\" She ended her acting career with the 1980 made-for-television film \"Gideon's Trumpet\".\nIn 1989, her autobiography was released, \"On the Other Hand\". In her later years, Wray continued to make public appearances. In 1991, she was crowned Queen of the Beaux Arts Ball, presiding with King Herbert Huncke.\nShe was approached by James Cameron to play Rose Dawson Calvert for his blockbuster \"Titanic\" (1997) with Kate Winslet to play her younger self, but she turned down the role, which was subsequently portrayed by Gloria Stuart in an Oscar-nominated performance. She was a special guest at the 70th Academy Awards, where the show's host Billy Crystal introduced her as the \"Beauty who charmed the Beast\". She was the only 1920s Hollywood actress in attendance that evening. On October 3, 1998, she appeared at the Pine Bluff Film Festival, which showed \"The Wedding March\" with live orchestral accompaniment.\nIn January 2003, at age 95, she appeared at the Palm Beach International Film Festival to celebrate the Rick McKay documentary film \"\", where she was honored with a \"Legend in Film\" award. In her later years, she visited the Empire State Building frequently; in 1991, she was a guest of honor at the building's 60th anniversary, and in May 2004, she made one of her last public appearances at the ESB. Her final public appearance was at the premiere of the documentary film \"Broadway: The Golden Age, by the Legends Who Were There\" in June 2004.\nPersonal life.\nWray married three times \u2013 to writers John Monk Saunders and Robert Riskin and the neurosurgeon Sanford Rothenberg (January 28, 1919 \u2013 January 4, 1991). She had three children: Susan Saunders, Victoria Riskin, and Robert Riskin Jr.\nAfter returning to the US after finishing \"The Clairvoyant\" she became a naturalized citizen of the United States in May 1935.\nDeath.\nWray died in her sleep of natural causes on the night of August 8, 2004, in her apartment on Fifth Avenue Manhattan. She is interred at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery in Hollywood, California.\nTwo days after her death, the lights of the Empire State Building were lowered for 15 minutes in her memory.\nHonors.\nIn 1989, Wray was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award. Wray was honored with a Legend in Film award at the 2003 Palm Beach International Film Festival. For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Wray was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6349 Hollywood Blvd. She received a star posthumously on Canada's Walk of Fame in Toronto on June 5, 2005. A small park near Lee's Creek on Main Street in Cardston, Alberta, her birthplace, was named Fay Wray Park in her honor. The small sign at the edge of the park on Main Street has a silhouette of King Kong. A large oil portrait of Wray by Alberta artist Neil Boyle is on display in the Empress Theatre in Fort Macleod, Alberta. In May 2006, Wray became one of the first four entertainers to be honored by Canada Post by being featured on a postage stamp.\nFilmography.\nFeatures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nShort subjects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPartial Television Credits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10967", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10967", "title": "Forgetting curve", "text": "Decline of memory retention in time\nThe forgetting curve hypothesizes the decline of memory retention in time. This curve shows how information is lost over time when there is no attempt to retain it. A related concept is the strength of memory that refers to the durability that memory traces in the brain. The stronger the memory, the longer period of time that a person is able to recall it. A typical graph of the forgetting curve purports to show that humans tend to halve their memory of newly learned knowledge in a matter of days or weeks unless they consciously review the learned material.\nThe forgetting curve supports one of the seven kinds of memory failure discussed in The Seven Sins of Memory: transience, which is the process of forgetting that occurs with the passage of time.\nHistory.\nFrom 1880 to 1885, Hermann Ebbinghaus ran a limited, incomplete study on himself and published his hypothesis in 1885 as \"\" (later translated into English as \"Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psychology\"). Ebbinghaus studied the memorisation of nonsense syllables, such as \"WID\" and \"ZOF\" (CVCs or Consonant\u2013Vowel\u2013Consonant) by repeatedly testing himself after various time periods and recording the results. He plotted these results on a graph creating what is now known as the \"forgetting curve\". Ebbinghaus investigated the rate of forgetting, but not the effect of spaced repetition on the increase in retrievability of memories.\nEbbinghaus's publication also included an equation to approximate his forgetting curve:\nformula_1\nHere, formula_2 represents 'Savings' expressed as a percentage, and formula_3 represents time in minutes, counting from one minute before end of learning. The constants c and k are 1.25 and 1.84 respectively. Savings is defined as the relative amount of time saved on the second learning trial as a result of having had the first. A savings of 100% would indicate that all items were still known from the first trial. A 75% savings would mean that relearning missed items required 25% as long as the original learning session (to learn all items). 'Savings' is thus, analogous to retention rate.\nIn 2015, an attempt to replicate the forgetting curve with one study subject has shown the experimental results similar to Ebbinghaus's original data.\nEbbinghaus's experiment has significantly contributed to experimental psychology. He was the first to carry out a series of well-designed experiments on the subject of forgetting, and he was one of the first to choose artificial stimuli in the research of experimental psychology. Since his introduction of nonsense syllables, a large number of experiments in experimental psychology has been based on highly controlled artificial stimuli.\nIncreasing rate of learning.\nHermann Ebbinghaus hypothesized that the speed of forgetting depends on a number of factors such as the difficulty of the learned material (e.g. how meaningful it is), its representation and other physiological factors such as stress and sleep. He further hypothesized that the basic forgetting rate differs little between individuals. He concluded that the difference in performance can be explained by mnemonic representation skills.\nHe went on to hypothesize that basic training in mnemonic techniques can help overcome those differences in part. He asserted that the best methods for increasing the strength of memory are:\nHis premise was that each repetition in learning increases the optimum interval before the next repetition is needed (for near-perfect retention, initial repetitions may need to be made within days, but later they can be made after years). He discovered that information is easier to recall when it's built upon things you already know, and the forgetting curve was flattened by every repetition. It appeared that by applying frequent training in learning, the information was solidified by repeated recalling.\nLater research also suggested that, other than the two factors Ebbinghaus proposed, higher original learning would also produce slower forgetting. The more information was originally learned, the slower the forgetting rate would be.\nSpending time each day to remember information will greatly decrease the effects of the forgetting curve. Some learning consultants claim reviewing material in the first 24 hours after learning information is the optimum time to actively recall the content and reset the forgetting curve. Evidence suggests waiting 10\u201320% of the time towards when the information will be needed is the optimum time for a single review.\nSome memories remain free from the detrimental effects of interference and do not necessarily follow the typical forgetting curve as various noise and outside factors influence what information would be remembered. There is debate among supporters of the hypothesis about the shape of the curve for events and facts that are more significant to the subject. Some supporters, for example, suggest that memories of shocking events such as the Kennedy Assassination or 9/11 are vividly imprinted in memory (flashbulb memory). Others have compared contemporaneous written recollections with recollections recorded years later, and found considerable variations as the subject's memory incorporates after-acquired information. There is considerable research in this area as it relates to eyewitness identification testimony, and eyewitness accounts are found demonstrably unreliable.\nEquations.\nMany equations have since been proposed to approximate forgetting, perhaps the simplest being an exponential curve described by the equation\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5 is retrievability (a measure of how easy it is to retrieve a piece of information from memory), formula_6 is stability of memory (determines how fast formula_5 falls over time in the absence of training, testing or other recall), and formula_3 is time.\nSimple equations such as this one were not found to provide a good fit to the available data.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10969", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10969", "title": "Field-programmable gate array", "text": "Array of logic gates that are reprogrammable\nA field-programmable gate array (FPGA) is a type of configurable integrated circuit that can be repeatedly programmed after manufacturing. FPGAs are a subset of logic devices referred to as programmable logic devices (PLDs). They consist of a grid-connected array of programmable logic blocks that can be configured \"in the field\" to interconnect with other logic blocks to perform various digital functions. FPGAs are often used in limited (low) quantity production of custom-made products, and in research and development, where the higher cost of individual FPGAs is not as important and where creating and manufacturing a custom circuit would not be feasible. Other applications for FPGAs include the telecommunications, automotive, aerospace, and industrial sectors, which benefit from their flexibility, high signal processing speed, and parallel processing abilities.\nA FPGA configuration is generally written using a hardware description language (HDL) e.g. VHDL, similar to the ones used for application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). Circuit diagrams were formerly used to write the configuration.\nThe logic blocks of an FPGA can be configured to perform complex combinational functions, or act as simple logic gates like AND and XOR. In most FPGAs, logic blocks also include memory elements, which may be simple flip-flops or more sophisticated blocks of memory. Many FPGAs can be reprogrammed to implement different logic functions, allowing flexible reconfigurable computing as performed in computer software.\nFPGAs also have a role in embedded system development due to their capability to start system software development simultaneously with hardware, enable system performance simulations at a very early phase of the development, and allow various system trials and design iterations before finalizing the system architecture.\nFPGAs are also commonly used during the development of ASICs to speed up the simulation process.\nHistory.\nThe FPGA industry sprouted from programmable read-only memory (PROM) and programmable logic devices (PLDs). PROMs and PLDs both had the option of being programmed in batches in a factory or in the field (field-programmable).\nAltera was founded in 1983 and delivered the industry's first reprogrammable logic device in 1984 \u2013 the EP300 \u2013 which featured a quartz window in the package that allowed users to shine an ultra-violet lamp on the die to erase the EPROM cells that held the device configuration.\nXilinx produced the first commercially viable field-programmable gate array in 1985\u00a0\u2013 the XC2064. The XC2064 had programmable gates and programmable interconnects between gates, the beginnings of a new technology and market. The XC2064 had 64 configurable logic blocks (CLBs), with two three-input lookup tables (LUTs).\nIn 1987, the Naval Surface Warfare Center funded an experiment proposed by Steve Casselman to develop a computer that would implement 600,000 reprogrammable gates. Casselman was successful and a patent related to the system was issued in 1992.\nAltera and Xilinx continued unchallenged and quickly grew from 1985 to the mid-1990s when competitors sprouted up, eroding a significant portion of their market share. By 1993, Actel (later Microsemi, now Microchip) was serving about 18 percent of the market.\nThe 1990s were a period of rapid growth for FPGAs, both in circuit sophistication and the volume of production. In the early 1990s, FPGAs were primarily used in telecommunications and networking. By the end of the decade, FPGAs found their way into consumer, automotive, and industrial applications.\nBy 2013, Altera (31 percent), Xilinx (36 percent) and Actel (10 percent) together represented approximately 77 percent of the FPGA market.\nCompanies like Microsoft have started to use FPGAs to accelerate high-performance, computationally intensive systems (like the data centers that operate their Bing search engine), due to the performance per watt advantage FPGAs deliver. Microsoft began using FPGAs to accelerate Bing in 2014, and in 2018 began deploying FPGAs across other data center workloads for their Azure cloud computing platform.\nSince 2019, modern generation of FPGAs have been integrated with other architectures like AI engines to target workloads in artificial intelligence domain.\nGrowth.\nThe following timelines indicate progress in different aspects of FPGA design.\nDesign starts.\nA \"design start\" is a new custom design for implementation on an FPGA.\nDesign.\nContemporary FPGAs have ample logic gates and RAM blocks to implement complex digital computations. FPGAs can be used to implement any logical function that an ASIC can perform. The ability to update the functionality after shipping, partial re-configuration of a portion of the design and the low non-recurring engineering costs relative to an ASIC design (notwithstanding the generally higher unit cost), offer advantages for many applications.\nAs FPGA designs employ very fast I/O rates and bidirectional data buses, it becomes a challenge to verify correct timing of valid data within setup time and hold time. Floor planning helps resource allocation within FPGAs to meet these timing constraints.\nSome FPGAs have analog features in addition to digital functions. The most common analog feature is a programmable slew rate on each output pin. This allows the user to set low rates on lightly loaded pins that would otherwise ring or couple unacceptably, and to set higher rates on heavily loaded high-speed channels that would otherwise run too slowly. Also common are quartz-crystal oscillator driver circuitry, on-chip RC oscillators, and phase-locked loops with embedded voltage-controlled oscillators used for clock generation and management as well as for high-speed serializer-deserializer (SERDES) transmit clocks and receiver clock recovery. Fairly common are differential comparators on input pins designed to be connected to differential signaling channels. A few mixed signal FPGAs have integrated peripheral analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) and digital-to-analog converters (DACs) with analog signal conditioning blocks, allowing them to operate as a system on a chip (SoC). Such devices blur the line between an FPGA, which carries digital ones and zeros on its internal programmable interconnect fabric, and field-programmable analog array (FPAA), which carries analog values on its internal programmable interconnect fabric.\nLogic blocks.\nThe most common FPGA architecture consists of an array of logic blocks called configurable logic blocks (CLBs) or logic array blocks (LABs) (depending on vendor), I/O pads, and routing channels. Generally, all the routing channels have the same width (number of signals). Multiple I/O pads may fit into the height of one row or the width of one column in the array.\n\"An application circuit must be mapped into an FPGA with adequate resources. While the number of logic blocks and I/Os required is easily determined from the design, the number of routing channels needed may vary considerably even among designs with the same amount of logic. For example, a crossbar switch requires much more routing than a systolic array with the same gate count. Since unused routing channels increase the cost (and decrease the performance) of the FPGA without providing any benefit, FPGA manufacturers try to provide just enough channels so that most designs that will fit in terms of lookup tables (LUTs) and I/Os can be routed. This is determined by estimates such as those derived from Rent's rule or by experiments with existing designs.\"\nIn general, a logic block consists of a few logical cells. A typical cell consists of a 4-input LUT, a full adder (FA) and a D-type flip-flop. The LUT might be split into two 3-input LUTs. In \"normal mode\" those are combined into a 4-input LUT through the first multiplexer (mux). In \"arithmetic\" mode, their outputs are fed to the adder. The selection of mode is programmed into the second mux. The output can be either synchronous or asynchronous, depending on the programming of the third mux. In practice, the entire adder or parts of it are stored as functions into the LUTs in order to save space.\nHard blocks.\nModern FPGA families expand upon the above capabilities to include higher-level functionality fixed in silicon. Having these common functions embedded in the circuit reduces the area required and gives those functions increased performance compared to building them from logical primitives. Examples of these include multipliers, generic DSP blocks, embedded processors, high-speed I/O logic and embedded memories.\nHigher-end FPGAs can contain high-speed multi-gigabit transceivers and \"hard IP cores\" such as processor cores, Ethernet medium access control units, PCI or PCI Express controllers, and external memory controllers. These cores exist alongside the programmable fabric, but they are built out of transistors instead of LUTs so they have ASIC-level performance and power consumption without consuming a significant amount of fabric resources, leaving more of the fabric free for the application-specific logic. The multi-gigabit transceivers also contain high-performance signal conditioning circuitry along with high-speed serializers and deserializers, components that cannot be built out of LUTs. Higher-level physical layer (PHY) functionality such as line coding may or may not be implemented alongside the serializers and deserializers in hard logic, depending on the FPGA.\nSoft core.\nAn alternate approach to using hard macro processors is to make use of soft processor IP cores that are implemented within the FPGA logic. Nios II, MicroBlaze and Mico32 are examples of popular softcore processors. Many modern FPGAs are programmed at \"run time\", which has led to the idea of reconfigurable computing or reconfigurable systems\u00a0\u2013 CPUs that reconfigure themselves to suit the task at hand. Additionally, new non-FPGA architectures are beginning to emerge. Software-configurable microprocessors such as the Stretch S5000 adopt a hybrid approach by providing an array of processor cores and FPGA-like programmable cores on the same chip.\nIntegration.\nIn 2012 the coarse-grained architectural approach was taken a step further by combining the logic blocks and interconnects of traditional FPGAs with embedded microprocessors and related peripherals to form a complete system on a programmable chip. Examples of such hybrid technologies can be found in the Xilinx Zynq-7000 all programmable SoC, which includes a 1.0\u00a0GHz dual-core ARM Cortex-A9 MPCore processor embedded within the FPGA's logic fabric, or in the Altera Arria V FPGA, which includes an 800\u00a0MHz dual-core ARM Cortex-A9 MPCore. The Atmel FPSLIC is another such device, which uses an AVR processor in combination with Atmel's programmable logic architecture. The Microsemi SmartFusion devices incorporate an ARM Cortex-M3 hard processor core (with up to 512\u00a0kB of flash and 64\u00a0kB of RAM) and analog peripherals such as a multi-channel analog-to-digital converters and digital-to-analog converters in their flash memory-based FPGA fabric.\nClocking.\nMost of the logic inside of an FPGA is synchronous circuitry that requires a clock signal. FPGAs contain dedicated global and regional routing networks for clock and reset, typically implemented as an H tree, so they can be delivered with minimal skew. FPGAs may contain analog phase-locked loop or delay-locked loop components to synthesize new clock frequencies and manage jitter. Complex designs can use multiple clocks with different frequency and phase relationships, each forming separate clock domains. These clock signals can be generated locally by an oscillator or they can be recovered from a data stream. Care must be taken when building clock domain crossing circuitry to avoid metastability. Some FPGAs contain dual port RAM blocks that are capable of working with different clocks, aiding in the construction of building FIFOs and dual port buffers that bridge clock domains.\n3D architectures.\nTo shrink the size and power consumption of FPGAs, vendors such as Tabula and Xilinx have introduced 3D or stacked architectures. Following the introduction of its 28\u00a0nm 7-series FPGAs, Xilinx said that several of the highest-density parts in those FPGA product lines will be constructed using multiple dies in one package, employing technology developed for 3D construction and stacked-die assemblies.\nXilinx's approach stacks several (three or four) active FPGA dies side by side on a silicon interposer\u00a0\u2013 a single piece of silicon that carries passive interconnect. The multi-die construction also allows different parts of the FPGA to be created with different process technologies, as the process requirements are different between the FPGA fabric itself and the very high speed 28\u00a0Gbit/s serial transceivers. An FPGA built in this way is called a \"heterogeneous FPGA\".\nAltera's heterogeneous approach involves using a single monolithic FPGA die and connecting other dies and technologies to the FPGA using Intel's embedded multi_die interconnect bridge (EMIB) technology.\nProgramming.\nTo define the behavior of the FPGA, the user provides a design in a hardware description language (HDL) or as a schematic design. The HDL form is more suited to work with large structures because it's possible to specify high-level functional behavior rather than drawing every piece by hand. However, schematic entry can allow for easier visualization of a design and its component modules.\nUsing an electronic design automation tool, a technology-mapped netlist is generated. The netlist can then be fit to the actual FPGA architecture using a process called \"place and route\", usually performed by the FPGA company's proprietary place-and-route software. The user will validate the results using timing analysis, simulation, and other verification and validation techniques. Once the design and validation process is complete, the binary file generated, typically using the FPGA vendor's proprietary software, is used to (re-)configure the FPGA. This file is transferred to the FPGA via a serial interface (JTAG) or to an external memory device such as an EEPROM.\nThe most common HDLs are VHDL and Verilog. National Instruments' LabVIEW graphical programming language (sometimes referred to as \"G\") has an FPGA add-in module available to target and program FPGA hardware. Verilog was created to simplify the process making HDL more robust and flexible. Verilog has a C-like syntax, unlike VHDL.\nTo simplify the design of complex systems in FPGAs, there exist libraries of predefined complex functions and circuits that have been tested and optimized to speed up the design process. These predefined circuits are commonly called \"intellectual property (IP) cores\", and are available from FPGA vendors and third-party IP suppliers. They are rarely free, and typically released under proprietary licenses. Other predefined circuits are available from developer communities such as OpenCores (typically released under free and open source licenses such as the GPL, BSD or similar license). Such designs are known as open-source hardware.\nIn a typical design flow, an FPGA application developer will simulate the design at multiple stages throughout the design process. Initially the RTL description in VHDL or Verilog is simulated by creating test benches to simulate the system and observe results. Then, after the synthesis engine has mapped the design to a netlist, the netlist is translated to a gate-level description where simulation is repeated to confirm the synthesis proceeded without errors. Finally, the design is laid out in the FPGA at which point propagation delay values can be back-annotated onto the netlist, and the simulation can be run again with these values.\nMore recently, OpenCL (Open Computing Language) is being used by programmers to take advantage of the performance and power efficiencies that FPGAs provide. OpenCL allows programmers to develop code in the C programming language. For further information, see high-level synthesis and C to HDL.\nMost FPGAs rely on an SRAM-based approach to be programmed. These FPGAs are in-system programmable and re-programmable, but require external boot devices. For example, flash memory or EEPROM devices may load contents into internal SRAM that controls routing and logic. The SRAM approach is based on CMOS.\nRarer alternatives to the SRAM approach include:\nManufacturers.\nIn 2016, long-time industry rivals Xilinx (now part of AMD) and Altera (now part of Intel) were the FPGA market leaders. At that time, they controlled nearly 90 percent of the market.\nBoth Xilinx and Altera provide proprietary electronic design automation software for Windows and Linux (ISE/Vivado and Quartus) which enables engineers to design, analyze, simulate, and synthesize (compile) their designs.\nIn March 2010, Tabula announced their FPGA technology that uses time-multiplexed logic and interconnect that claims potential cost savings for high-density applications. On March 24, 2015, Tabula officially shut down.\nOn June 1, 2015, Intel announced it would acquire Altera for approximately US$16.7 billion and completed the acquisition on December 30, 2015.\nOn October 27, 2020, AMD announced it would acquire Xilinx and completed the acquisition valued at about US$50 billion in February 2022.\nIn February 2024 Altera became independent of Intel again.\nOther manufacturers include:\nApplications.\nAn FPGA can be used to solve any problem which is computable. FPGAs can be used to implement a soft microprocessor, such as the Xilinx MicroBlaze or Altera Nios II. But their advantage lies in that they are significantly faster for some applications because of their parallel nature and optimality in terms of the number of gates used for certain processes.\nFPGAs were originally introduced as competitors to complex programmable logic devices (CPLDs) to implement glue logic for printed circuit boards. As their size, capabilities, and speed increased, FPGAs took over additional functions to the point where some are now marketed as full systems on chips (SoCs). Particularly with the introduction of dedicated multipliers into FPGA architectures in the late 1990s, applications that had traditionally been the sole reserve of digital signal processors (DSPs) began to use FPGAs instead.\nThe evolution of FPGAs has motivated an increase in the use of these devices, whose architecture allows the development of hardware solutions optimized for complex tasks, such as 3D MRI image segmentation, 3D discrete wavelet transform, tomographic image reconstruction, or PET/MRI systems. The developed solutions can perform intensive computation tasks with parallel processing, are dynamically reprogrammable, and have a low cost, all while meeting the hard real-time requirements associated with medical imaging.\nAnother trend in the use of FPGAs is hardware acceleration, where one can use the FPGA to accelerate certain parts of an algorithm and share part of the computation between the FPGA and a general-purpose processor. The search engine Bing is noted for adopting FPGA acceleration for its search algorithm in 2014. As of 2018[ [update]], FPGAs are seeing increased use as AI accelerators including Microsoft's Project Catapult and for accelerating artificial neural networks for machine learning applications.\nOriginally, FPGAs were reserved for specific vertical applications where the volume of production is small. For these low-volume applications, the premium that companies pay in hardware cost per unit for a programmable chip is more affordable than the development resources spent on creating an ASIC. Often a custom-made chip would be cheaper if made in larger quantities, but FPGAs may be chosen to quickly bring a product to market. By 2017, new cost and performance dynamics broadened the range of viable applications.\nOther uses for FPGAs include:\nUsage by United States military.\nFPGAs play a crucial role in modern military communications, especially in systems like the Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) and in devices from companies such as Thales and Harris Corporation. Their flexibility and programmability make them ideal for military communications, offering customizable and secure signal processing. In the JTRS, used by the US military, FPGAs provide adaptability and real-time processing, crucial for meeting various communication standards and encryption methods.\nSecurity.\nConcerning hardware security, FPGAs have both advantages and disadvantages as compared to ASICs or secure microprocessors. FPGAs' flexibility makes malicious modifications during fabrication a lower risk. Previously, for many FPGAs, the design bitstream was exposed while the FPGA loads it from external memory, typically during powerup. All major FPGA vendors now offer a spectrum of security solutions to designers such as bitstream encryption and authentication. For example, Altera and Xilinx offer AES encryption (up to 256-bit) for bitstreams stored in an external flash memory. Physical unclonable functions (PUFs) are integrated circuits that have their own unique signatures and can be used to secure FPGAs while taking up very little hardware space.\nFPGAs that store their configuration internally in nonvolatile flash memory, such as Microsemi's ProAsic\u00a03 or Lattice's XP2 programmable devices, do not expose the bitstream and do not need encryption. Customers wanting a higher guarantee of tamper resistance can use write-once, antifuse FPGAs from vendors such as Microsemi.\nWith its Stratix 10 FPGAs and SoCs, Altera introduced a Secure Device Manager and physical unclonable functions to provide high levels of protection against physical attacks.\nIn 2012 researchers Sergei Skorobogatov and Christopher Woods demonstrated that some FPGAs can be vulnerable to hostile intent. They discovered a critical backdoor vulnerability had been manufactured in silicon as part of the Actel/Microsemi ProAsic\u00a03 making it vulnerable on many levels such as reprogramming crypto and access keys, accessing unencrypted bitstream, modifying low-level silicon features, and extracting configuration data.\nIn 2020 a critical vulnerability (named Starbleed) was discovered in all Xilinx\u00a07 series FPGAs that rendered bitstream encryption useless. There is no workaround. Xilinx did not produce a hardware revision. Ultrascale and later devices, already on the market at the time, were not affected.\nSimilar technologies.\nHistorically, FPGAs have been slower, less energy efficient and generally achieved less functionality than their fixed ASIC counterparts. A study from 2006 showed that designs implemented on FPGAs need on average 40 times as much area, draw 12 times as much dynamic power, and run at one third the speed of corresponding ASIC implementations.\nAdvantages of FPGAs include the ability to reprogram equipment in the field to fix bugs or make other improvements. Some FPGAs have the capability of partial re-configuration that lets one portion of the device be re-programmed while other portions continue running. Other advantages may include shorter time to market and lower non-recurring engineering costs. Vendors can also take a middle road via FPGA prototyping: developing their prototype hardware on FPGAs, but manufacturing their final version as an ASIC after the design has been committed. This is often also the case with new processor designs.\nThe primary differences between CPLDs and FPGAs are architectural. A CPLD has a comparatively restrictive structure consisting of one or more programmable sum-of-products logic arrays feeding a relatively small number of clocked registers. As a result, CPLDs are less flexible but have the advantage of more predictable propagation delay. FPGA architectures, on the other hand, are dominated by interconnect. This makes them far more flexible but also far more complex to design for, or at least requiring more complex electronic design automation (EDA) software. Another distinction between FPGAs and CPLDs is one of size, as FPGAs are usually much larger in terms of resources than CPLDs. Typically only FPGAs contain more complex embedded functions such as adders, multipliers, memory, and serializer/deserializers. Another common distinction is that CPLDs contain embedded flash memory to store their configuration, while FPGAs typically store their configuration in SRAM and require external non-volatile memory to initialize it on powerup. When a design requires simple instant-on, CPLDs are generally preferred. Sometimes both CPLDs and FPGAs are used in a single system design. In those designs, CPLDs generally perform glue logic functions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10970", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10970", "title": "Forgetting rate", "text": ""}
{"id": "10971", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10971", "title": "Free-running sleep", "text": "Rare, shifting sleep pattern\nFree-running sleep is a rare sleep pattern whereby the sleep schedule of a person shifts later every day. It occurs as the sleep disorder non-24-hour sleep\u2013wake disorder or artificially as part of experiments used in the study of circadian rhythms and other rhythms in biology. Study subjects are shielded from all time cues, often by a constant light protocol, by a constant dark protocol or by the use of light/dark conditions to which the organism cannot entrain such as the ultrashort protocol of one hour dark and two hours light. Also, limited amounts of food may be made available at short intervals so as to avoid entrainment to mealtimes. Subjects are thus forced to live by their internal circadian \"clocks\".\nBackground.\nThe individual's or animal's circadian phase can be known only by the monitoring of some kind of output of the circadian system, the internal \"body clock\". The researcher can precisely determine, for example, the daily cycles of gene activity, body temperature, blood pressure, hormone secretion or sleep and activity/alertness. Alertness in humans can be determined by many kinds of verbal and non-verbal tests, whereas alertness in animals can usually be assessed by observing physical activity (for example, of wheel-running in rodents).\nWhen animals or people \"free-run\", experiments can be done to see what sort of signals, known as zeitgebers, are effective in entrainment. Also, much work has been done to see how long or short a circadian cycle can be entrained to various organisms. For example, some animals can be entrained to a 22-hour day, but they can not be entrained to a 20-hour day. In recent studies funded by the U.S. space industry, it has been shown that most humans can be entrained to a 23.5-hour day and to a 24.65-hour day.\nThe effect of unintended time cues is called \"masking\" and can totally confound experimental results. Examples of masking are morning rush traffic audible to the subjects, or researchers or maintenance staff visiting subjects on a regular schedule.\nIn humans.\nNon-24-hour sleep\u2013wake disorder, also referred to as \"free-running disorder\" (FRD) or \"Non-24\", is one of the circadian rhythm sleep disorders in humans. It affects more than half of people who are totally blind and a smaller number of sighted individuals.\nAmong blind people, the cause is the inability to register, and therefore to entrain to, light cues. The many blind people who do entrain to the 24-hour light/dark cycle have eyes with functioning retinas including operative non-visual light-sensitive cells, ipRGCs. These ganglion cells, which contain melanopsin, convey their signals to the \"circadian clock\" via the retinohypothalamic tract (branching off from the optic nerve), linking the retina to the pineal gland.\nAmong sighted individuals, Non-24 usually first appears in the teens or early twenties. As with delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPS or DSPD), in the absence of neurological damage due to trauma or stroke, cases almost never appear after the age of 30. Non-24 affects more sighted males than sighted females. A quarter of sighted individuals with Non-24 also have an associated psychiatric condition, and a quarter of them have previously shown symptoms of DSPS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10972", "revid": "50798304", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10972", "title": "Fenrir", "text": "Monstrous wolf in Norse mythology\nFenrir (Old Norse 'fen-dweller') or Fenris\u00falfr (Old Norse \"Fenrir's wolf\", often translated \"Fenris-wolf\"), also referred to as Hr\u00f3\u00f0vitnir (Old Norse \"fame-wolf\") and V\u00e1nagandr (Old Norse 'monster of the [River] V\u00e1n'), is a monstrous wolf in Norse mythology. In Old Norse texts, Fenrir plays a key role during the events of Ragnar\u00f6k, where he is foretold to assist in setting the world aflame, resulting in the collapse of humanity and society, and killing the god Odin. \nFenrir, along with Hel and J\u00f6rmungandr, is a child of Loki and female j\u00f6tunn Angrbo\u00f0a. He is attested in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, and the \"Prose Edda\" and \"Heimskringla\", composed in the 13th century. In both the \"Poetic Edda\" and \"Prose Edda\", Fenrir is the father of the wolves Sk\u00f6ll and Hati Hr\u00f3\u00f0vitnisson, is a son of Loki and is foretold to kill the god Odin during the events of Ragnar\u00f6k, but will in turn be killed by Odin's son V\u00ed\u00f0arr.\nIn the \"Prose Edda\", additional information is given about Fenrir, including that, due to the gods' knowledge of prophecies foretelling great trouble from Fenrir and his rapid growth, the gods bound him and as a result Fenrir bit off the right hand of the god T\u00fdr. Depictions of Fenrir have been identified on various objects and scholarly theories have been proposed regarding Fenrir's relation to other canine beings in Norse mythology. Fenrir has been the subject of artistic depictions and he appears in literature.\nAttestations.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nFenrir is mentioned in three stanzas of the poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" and in two stanzas of the poem \"Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nism\u00e1l\". In stanza 40 of the poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", a v\u00f6lva divulges to Odin that, in the east, an old woman sat in the forest J\u00e1rnvi\u00f0r \"and bred there the broods of Fenrir. There will come from them all one of that number to be a moon-snatcher in troll's skin.\" Further into the poem the v\u00f6lva foretells that Odin will be consumed by Fenrir at Ragnar\u00f6k:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the stanza that follows the v\u00f6lva describes that Odin's \"tall child of Triumph's Sire\" (Odin's son V\u00ed\u00f0arr) will then come to \"strike at the beast of slaughter\" and with his hands he will drive a sword into the heart of \"Hve\u00f0rungr's son\", avenging the death of his father.\nIn the first of two stanzas mentioning Fenrir in \"Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nism\u00e1l\" Odin poses a question to the wise j\u00f6tunn Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the stanza that follows Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir responds that S\u00f3l (here referred to as \"\u00c1lfr\u00f6\u00f0ull\") will bear a daughter before Fenrir attacks her, and that this daughter shall continue the paths of her deceased mother through the heavens.\nIn the flyting poem \"Lokasenna\" verse 38, Loki insults T\u00fdr by saying he cannot deal fairly with men because \"it was your right hand/ that Fenrir tore away\" referring to the association between left hands and dishonesty. T\u00fdr responds in stanza 39 with references to the incident of Fenrir's binding, \"I lost my hand, you the famous wolf.\"\n\"Prose Edda\".\nIn the \"Prose Edda\", Fenrir is mentioned in three books: \"Gylfaginning\", \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" and \"H\u00e1ttatal\".\n\"Gylfaginning\" chapters 13 and 25.\nIn chapter 13 of the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Gylfaginning\", Fenrir is first mentioned in a stanza quoted from \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\". Fenrir is first mentioned in prose in chapter 25, where the enthroned figure of High tells Gangleri (described as King Gylfi in disguise) about the god T\u00fdr. High says that one example of T\u00fdr's bravery is that when the \u00c6sir were luring Fenrir (referred to here as \"Fenris\u00falfr\") to place the fetter Gleipnir on the wolf, T\u00fdr placed his hand within the wolf's mouth as a pledge. This was done at Fenrir's own request because he did not trust that the \u00c6sir would let him go. As a result, when the \u00c6sir refused to release him, he bit off T\u00fdr's hand at a location \"now called the wolf-joint\" (the wrist), causing T\u00fdr to be one-handed and \"not considered to be a promoter of settlements between people.\"\n\"Gylfaginning\" chapter 34.\nIn chapter 34, High describes Loki, and says that Loki had three children with a woman named Angrbo\u00f0a located in the land of J\u00f6tunheimr; Fenris\u00falfr, the serpent J\u00f6rmungandr, and the female being Hel. High continues that, once the gods found that these three children were being brought up in the land of J\u00f6tunheimr, and when the gods \"traced prophecies that from these siblings great mischief and disaster would arise for them\" the gods expected a lot of trouble from the three children, partially due to the nature of the mother of the children, yet worse so due to the nature of their father.\nHigh says that Odin sent the gods to gather the children and bring them to him. Upon their arrival, Odin threw J\u00f6rmungandr into \"that deep sea that lies round all lands\", and then threw Hel into Niflheim, and bestowed upon her authority over nine worlds. However, the \u00c6sir brought up the wolf \"at home\", and only T\u00fdr had the courage to approach Fenrir, and give Fenrir food. The gods noticed that Fenrir was growing rapidly every day, and since all prophecies foretold that Fenrir was destined to cause them harm, the gods formed a plan. The gods prepared three fetters: The first, greatly strong, was called Leyding. They brought Leyding to Fenrir and suggested that the wolf try his strength with it. Fenrir judged that it was not beyond his strength, and so let the gods do what they wanted with it. At Fenrir's first kick the bind snapped, and Fenrir loosened himself from Leyding. The gods made a second fetter, twice as strong, and named it Dromi. The gods asked Fenrir to try the new fetter, and that should he break this feat of engineering, Fenrir would achieve great fame for his strength. Fenrir considered that, while the fetter was very strong, his strength had grown since he broke Leyding; and also that he would have to take some risks if he were to become famous. Fenrir allowed them to place the fetter.\nWhen the \u00c6sir exclaimed that they were ready, Fenrir shook himself, knocked the fetter to the ground, strained hard, and kicking with his feet, snapped the fetter \u2013 breaking it into pieces that flew far into the distance. High says that, as a result, to \"loose from Leyding\" or to \"strike out of Dromi\" have become sayings for when something is achieved with great effort. The \u00c6sir started to fear that they would not be able to bind Fenrir, and so Odin sent Freyr's messenger Sk\u00edrnir down into the land of Svart\u00e1lfaheimr to \"some dwarfs\" and had them make a fetter called Gleipnir. The dwarves constructed Gleipnir from six mythical ingredients. After an exchange between Gangleri and High, High continues that the fetter was smooth and soft as a silken ribbon, yet strong and firm. The messenger brought the ribbon to the \u00c6sir, and they thanked him heartily for completing the task.\nThe \u00c6sir went out on to the lake Amsvartnir sent for Fenrir to accompany them, and continued to the island Lyngvi (Old Norse \"a place overgrown with heather\"). The gods showed Fenrir the silken fetter Gleipnir, told him to tear it, stated that it was much stronger than it appeared, passed it among themselves, used their hands to pull it, and yet it did not tear. However, they said that Fenrir would be able to tear it, to which Fenrir replied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \u00c6sir said Fenrir would quickly tear apart a thin silken strip, noting that Fenrir earlier broke great iron binds, and added that if Fenrir wasn't able to break slender Gleipnir then Fenrir is nothing for the gods to fear, and as a result would be freed. Fenrir responded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWith this statement, all of the \u00c6sir look to one another, finding themselves in a dilemma. Everyone refused to place their hand in Fenrir's mouth until T\u00fdr put out his right hand and placed it into the wolf's jaws. When Fenrir kicked, Gleipnir caught tightly, and the more Fenrir struggled, the stronger the band grew. At this, everyone laughed, except T\u00fdr, who there lost his right hand. When the gods knew that Fenrir was fully bound, they took a cord called Gelgja (Old Norse \"fetter\") hanging from Gleipnir, inserted the cord through a large stone slab called Gj\u00f6ll (Old Norse \"scream\"), and the gods fastened the stone slab deep into the ground. After, the gods took a great rock called Thviti (Old Norse \"hitter, batterer\"), and thrust it even further into the ground as an anchoring peg. Fenrir reacted violently; he opened his jaws very wide, and tried to bite the gods. Then the gods thrust a sword into his mouth. Its hilt touched the lower jaw and its point the upper one; by means of it the jaws of the wolf were spread apart and the wolf gagged. Fenrir \"howled horribly\", saliva ran from his mouth, and this saliva formed the river V\u00e1n (Old Norse \"hope\"). There Fenrir will lie until Ragnar\u00f6k. Gangleri comments that Loki created a \"pretty terrible family\" though important, and asks why the \u00c6sir did not just kill Fenrir there since they expected great malice from him. High replies that \"so greatly did the gods respect their holy places and places of sanctuary that they did not want to defile them with the wolf's blood even though the prophecies say that he will be the death of Odin.\"\n\"Gylfaginning\" chapters 38 and 51.\nIn chapter 38, High says that there are many men in Valhalla, and many more who will arrive, yet they will \"seem too few when the wolf comes\". In chapter 51, High foretells that as part of the events of Ragnar\u00f6k, after Fenrir's son Sk\u00f6ll has swallowed the sun and his other son Hati Hr\u00f3\u00f0vitnisson has swallowed the moon, the stars will disappear from the sky. The earth will shake violently, trees will be uprooted, mountains will fall, and all binds will snap \u2013 Fenris\u00falfr will be free. Fenris\u00falfr will go forth with his mouth opened wide, his upper jaw touching the sky and his lower jaw the earth, and flames will burn from his eyes and nostrils. Later, Fenris\u00falfr will arrive at the field V\u00edgr\u00ed\u00f0r with his sibling J\u00f6rmungandr. With the forces assembled there, an immense battle will take place. During this, Odin will ride to fight Fenris\u00falfr. During the battle, Fenris\u00falfr will eventually swallow Odin, killing him, and Odin's son V\u00ed\u00f0arr will move forward and kick one foot into the lower jaw of the wolf. This foot will bear a legendary shoe \"for which the material has been collected throughout all time\". With one hand, V\u00ed\u00f0arr will take hold of the wolf's upper jaw and tear apart his mouth, killing Fenris\u00falfr. High follows this prose description by citing various quotes from \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" in support, some of which mention Fenrir.\n\"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" and \"H\u00e1ttatal\".\nIn the Epilogue section of the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", a euhemerized monologue equates Fenris\u00falfr to Pyrrhus, attempting to rationalize that \"it killed Odin, and Pyrrhus could be said to be a wolf according to their religion, for he paid no respect to places of sanctuary when he killed the king in the temple in front of Thor's altar.\" In chapter 2, \"wolf's enemy\" is cited as a kenning for Odin as used by the 10th century skald Egill Skallagr\u00edmsson. In chapter 9, \"feeder of the wolf\" is given as a kenning for T\u00fdr and, in chapter 11, \"slayer of Fenris\u00falfr\" is presented as a kenning for V\u00ed\u00f0arr. In chapter 50, a section of \"Ragnarsdr\u00e1pa\" by the 9th century skald Bragi Boddason is quoted that refers to Hel, the being, as \"the monstrous wolf's sister\". In chapter 75, names for wargs and wolves are listed, including both \"Hr\u00f3\u00f0vitnir\" and \"Fenrir\". \"Fenrir\" appears twice in verse as a common noun for a \"wolf\" or \"warg\" in chapter 58 of \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", and in chapter 56 of the book \"H\u00e1ttatal\". Additionally, the name \"Fenrir\" can be found among a list of j\u00f6tnar in chapter 75 of \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\".\n\"Heimskringla\".\nAt the end of the \"Heimskringla\" saga \"H\u00e1konar saga g\u00f3\u00f0a\", the poem \"H\u00e1konarm\u00e1l\" by the 10th century skald Eyvindr sk\u00e1ldaspillir is presented. The poem is about the fall of King Haakon I of Norway; although he is Christian, he is taken by two valkyries to Valhalla, and is there received as one of the Einherjar. Towards the end of the poem, a stanza relates sooner will the bonds of Fenrir snap than as good a king as Haakon shall stand in his place:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArchaeological record.\nThorwald's Cross.\n, a partially surviving runestone erected at Kirk Andreas on the Isle of Man, depicts a bearded human holding a spear downward at a wolf, his right foot in its mouth, while a large bird sits at his shoulder. Rundata dates it to 940, while Pluskowski dates it to the 11th century. This depiction has been interpreted as Odin, with a raven or eagle at his shoulder, being consumed by Fenrir at Ragnar\u00f6k. On the reverse of the stone is another image parallel to it that has been described as Christ triumphing over Satan. These combined elements have led to the cross as being described as \"syncretic art\"; a mixture of pagan and Christian beliefs.\nGosforth Cross.\nThe mid-11th century Gosforth Cross, located in Cumbria, England, has been described as depicting a combination of scenes from the Christian Judgement Day and the pagan Ragnar\u00f6k. The cross features various figures depicted in Borre style, including a man with a spear facing a monstrous head, one of whose feet is thrust into the beast's forked tongue and on its lower jaw, while a hand is placed against its upper jaw, a scene interpreted as V\u00ed\u00f0arr fighting Fenrir. This depiction has been theorized as a metaphor for Christ's defeat of Satan.\nLedberg stone.\nThe 11th century Ledberg stone in Sweden, similarly to Thorwald's Cross, features a figure with his foot at the mouth of a four-legged beast, and this may also be a depiction of Odin being devoured by Fenrir at Ragnar\u00f6k. Below the beast and the man is a depiction of a legless, helmeted man, with his arms in a prostrate position. The Younger Futhark inscription on the stone bears a commonly seen memorial dedication, but is followed by an encoded runic sequence that has been described as \"mysterious\", and \"an interesting magic formula which is known from all over the ancient Norse world\".\nOther.\nIf the images on the Tullstorp Runestone are correctly identified as depicting Ragnar\u00f6k, then Fenrir is shown above the ship Naglfar.\nMeyer Schapiro theorizes a connection between the \"Hell Mouth\" that appears in medieval Christian iconography and Fenrir. According to Schapiro, \"the Anglo-Saxon taste for the Hell Mouth was perhaps influenced by the northern pagan myth of the Crack of Doom and the battle with the wolf, who devoured Odin.\"\nScholars propose that a variety of objects from the archaeological record depict T\u00fdr. For example, a Migration Period gold bracteate from Trollh\u00e4ttan, Sweden, features a person receiving a bite on the hand from a beast, which may depict T\u00fdr and Fenrir. A Viking Age hogback in Sockburn, County Durham, North East England may depict T\u00fdr and Fenrir.\nTheories.\nIn reference to Fenrir's presentation in the \"Prose Edda\", Andy Orchard theorizes that \"the hound (or wolf)\" Garmr, Sk\u00f6ll, and Hati Hr\u00f3\u00f0vitnisson were originally simply all Fenrir, stating that \"Snorri, characteristically, is careful to make distinctions, naming the wolves who devour the sun and moon as Sk\u00f6ll and Hati, and describing an encounter between Garm and T\u00fdr (who, one would have thought, might like to get his hand on Fenrir) at Ragnar\u00f6k.\"\nJohn Lindow says that it is unclear why the gods decide to raise Fenrir as opposed to his siblings Hel and J\u00f6rmungandr in \"Gylfaginning\" chapter 35, theorizing that it may be \"because Odin had a connection with wolves? Because Loki was Odin's blood brother?\" Referring to the same chapter, Lindow comments that in neither of the phrases does it appear that Fenrir's binding have left any other traces. Lindow compares Fenrir's role to his father Loki and Fenrir's sibling J\u00f6rmungandr, in that they all spend time with the gods, are bound or cast out by them, return \"at the end of the current mythic order to destroy them, only to be destroyed himself as a younger generation of gods, one of them his slayer, survives into the new world order.\" He also points to Fenrir's binding as part of a recurring theme of the bound monster, where an enemy of the gods is bound, but destined to break free at Ragnarok.\nIndo-European parallels have been proposed between myths of Fenrir and the Persian demon Ahriman. The Yashts refer to a story where Taxma Urupi rode Angra Mainyu as a horse for thirty years. An elaboration of this allusion is found only in a late Parsi commentary. The ruler Taxmoruw (Taxma Urupi) managed to lasso Ahriman (Angra Mainyu) and keep him tied up while taking him for a ride three times a day. After thirty years, Ahriman outwitted and swallowed Taxmoruw. In a sexual encounter with Ahriman, Jamshid, Taxmoruw's brother, inserted his hand into Ahriman's anus and pulled out his brother's corpse. His hand withered from contact with the diabolic innards. The suggested parallels with Fenrir myths are the binding of an evil being by a ruler figure and the subsequent swallowing of the ruler figure by the evil being (Odin and Fenrir), trickery involving the thrusting of a hand into a monster's orifice and the affliction of the inserted limb (T\u00fdr and Fenrir).\nEthologist Valerius Geist wrote that Fenrir's maiming and ultimate killing of Odin, who had previously nurtured him, was likely based on true experiences of wolf-behaviour, seeing as wolves are genetically encoded to rise up in the pack hierarchy and have, on occasion, been recorded to rebel against, and kill, their parents. Geist states that \"apparently, even the ancients knew that wolves may turn on their parents and siblings and kill them.\"\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10974", "revid": "49257428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10974", "title": "Final Fantasy", "text": "Japanese media franchise\n is a Japanese fantasy anthology media franchise created by Hironobu Sakaguchi which is owned, developed, and published by Square Enix (formerly Square). The franchise centers on a series of fantasy role-playing video games. The first game in the series was released in 1987, with 16 numbered main entries having been released to date.\nThe franchise has since branched into other video game genres such as tactical role-playing, action role-playing, massively multiplayer online role-playing, racing, third-person shooter, fighting, and rhythm, as well as branching into other media, including films, anime, manga, and novels.\n\"Final Fantasy\" is mostly an anthology series with primary installments being standalone role-playing games, each with different settings, plots and main characters, but the franchise is linked by several recurring elements, including game mechanics and recurring character names. Each plot centers on a particular group of heroes who are battling a great evil, but also explores the characters' internal struggles and relationships. Character names are frequently derived from the history, languages, pop culture, and mythologies of cultures worldwide. The mechanics of each game involve similar battle systems and maps.\n\"Final Fantasy\" has been both critically and commercially successful. Several entries are regarded as some of the greatest video games of all time, with the series selling more than 200 million copies worldwide, making it one of the best-selling video game franchises of all time. The series is well known for its innovation, cutting-edge visuals such as the inclusion of full-motion videos and photorealistic character models, and music by the likes of Nobuo Uematsu. It has popularized many features now common in role-playing games, also popularizing the genre as a whole in markets outside Japan.\nMedia.\nGames.\nThe first installment of the series was released in Japan on December 18, 1987. Subsequent games are numbered and given a story unrelated to previous games, so the numbers refer to volumes rather than to sequels. Many \"Final Fantasy\" games have been localized for markets in North America, Europe, and Australia on numerous video game consoles, personal computers (PC), and mobile phones. As of June 2023, the series includes the main installments from \"Final Fantasy\" to \"Final Fantasy XVI\", as well as direct sequels and spin-offs, both released and confirmed as being in development. Most of the older games have been remade or re-released on multiple platforms.\nMain series.\nThree \"Final Fantasy\" installments were released on the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES). \"Final Fantasy\" was released in Japan in 1987 and in North America in 1990. It introduced many concepts to the console RPG genre, and has since been remade on several platforms. \"Final Fantasy II\", released in 1988 in Japan, has been bundled with \"Final Fantasy\" in several re-releases. The last of the NES installments, \"Final Fantasy III\", was released in Japan in 1990, but was not released elsewhere until a Nintendo DS remake came out in 2006.\nThe Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) also featured three installments of the main series, all of which have been re-released on several platforms. \"Final Fantasy IV\" was released in 1991; in North America, it was released as \"Final Fantasy II\". It introduced the \"Active Time Battle\" system. \"Final Fantasy V\", released in 1992 in Japan, was the first game in the series to spawn a sequel: a short anime series, \"\". \"Final Fantasy VI\" was released in Japan in 1994, titled \"Final Fantasy III\" in North America.\nThe PlayStation console saw the release of three main \"Final Fantasy\" games. \"Final Fantasy VII\" (1997) moved away from the two-dimensional (2D) graphics used in the first six games to three-dimensional (3D) computer graphics; the game features polygonal characters on pre-rendered backgrounds. It also introduced a more modern setting, a style that was carried over to the next game. It was also the second in the series to be released in Europe, with the first being \"Final Fantasy Mystic Quest\". \"Final Fantasy VIII\" was published in 1999, and was the first to consistently use realistically proportioned characters and feature a vocal piece as its theme music. \"Final Fantasy IX\", released in 2000, returned to the series' roots, by revisiting a more traditional \"Final Fantasy\" setting, rather than the more modern worlds of \"VII\" and \"VIII\".\nThree main installments, as well as one online game, were published for the PlayStation 2. \"Final Fantasy X\" (2001) introduced full 3D areas and voice acting to the series, and was the first to spawn a sub-sequel (\"Final Fantasy X-2\", published in 2003). The first massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) in the series, \"Final Fantasy XI\", was released on the PS2 and PC in 2002, and later on the Xbox 360. It introduced real-time battles instead of random encounters. \"Final Fantasy XII\", published in 2006, also includes real-time battles in large, interconnected playfields. The game is also the first in the main series to utilize a world used in a previous game, namely the land of Ivalice, which was previously featured in \"Final Fantasy Tactics\" and \"Vagrant Story\".\nIn 2009, \"Final Fantasy XIII\" was released in Japan, and in North America and Europe the following year, for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. It is the flagship installment of the \"Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy\" series and became the first mainline game to spawn two sub-sequels (\"XIII-2\" and '). It was also the first game released in Chinese and high definition along with being released on two consoles at once. \"Final Fantasy XIV\", a MMORPG, was released worldwide on Microsoft Windows in 2010, but it received heavy criticism when it was launched, prompting Square Enix to rerelease the game as ', this time to the PlayStation 3 as well, in 2013. \"Final Fantasy XV\" is an action role-playing game that was released for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One in 2016. Originally a \"XIII\" spin-off titled \"Versus XIII\", \"XV\" uses the mythos of the \"Fabula Nova Crystallis\" series, although in many other respects the game stands on its own and has since been distanced from the series by its developers. The sixteenth mainline entry, \"Final Fantasy XVI\", was released in 2023 for PlayStation 5.\nRemakes, sequels and spin-offs.\n\"Final Fantasy\" has spawned numerous spin-offs and metaseries. Several are, in fact, not \"Final Fantasy\" games, but were rebranded for North American release. Examples include the \"SaGa\" series, rebranded \"The Final Fantasy Legend\", and its two sequels, \"Final Fantasy Legend II\" and \"III\". \"Final Fantasy Mystic Quest\" was specifically developed for a United States audience, and \"Final Fantasy Tactics\" is a tactical RPG that features many references and themes found in the series. The spin-off \"Chocobo\" series, \"Crystal Chronicles\" series, and \"Kingdom Hearts\" series also include multiple \"Final Fantasy\" elements. In 2003, the \"Final Fantasy\" series' first sub-sequel, \"Final Fantasy X-2\", was released. \"Final Fantasy XIII\" was originally intended to stand on its own, but the team wanted to explore the world, characters and mythos more, resulting in the development and release of two sequels in 2011 and respectively, creating the series' first official trilogy. \"Dissidia Final Fantasy\" was released in 2009, a fighting game that features heroes and villains from the first ten games of the main series. It was followed by a prequel in 2011, a sequel in 2015 and a mobile spin-off in 2017. Other spin-offs have taken the form of subseries\u2014\"Compilation of Final Fantasy VII\", \"Ivalice Alliance\", and \"Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy\". In 2022, Square Enix released an action-role playing title \"\" developed in collaboration with Team Ninja, which takes place in an alternate, reimagined reality based on the setting of the original \"Final Fantasy\" game, depicting a prequel story that explores the origins of the antagonist Chaos and the emergence of the four Warriors of Light. Enhanced 3D remakes of \"Final Fantasy III\" and \"IV\" were released in 2006 and 2007 respectively. The first installment of the \"Final Fantasy VII Remake\" project was released on the PlayStation 4 in 2020. The second and latest installment of the remake trilogy, \"Final Fantasy VII Rebirth\", was released on the PlayStation 5 in 2024.\nOther media.\nFilm and television.\nSquare Enix has expanded the \"Final Fantasy\" series into various media. Multiple anime and computer-generated imagery (CGI) films have been produced that are based either on individual \"Final Fantasy\" games or on the series as a whole. The first was an original video animation (OVA), ', a sequel to \"Final Fantasy V\". The story was set in the same world as the game, although 200 years in the future. It was released as four 30-minute episodes, first in Japan in 1994 and later in the United States by Urban Vision in 1998. In 2001, Square Pictures released its first feature film, '. The film is set on a future Earth invaded by alien life forms. \"The Spirits Within\" was the first animated feature to seriously attempt to portray photorealistic CGI humans, but was considered a box office bomb and garnered mixed reviews.\nA 25-episode anime television series, \"\", was released in 2001 based on the common elements of the \"Final Fantasy\" series. It was broadcast in Japan by TV Tokyo and released in North America by ADV Films.\nIn 2005, ', a feature length direct-to-DVD CGI film, and ', a non-canon OVA, were released as part of the \"Compilation of Final Fantasy VII\". \"Advent Children\" was animated by Visual Works, which helped the company create CG sequences for the games. The film, unlike \"The Spirits Within\", became a commercial success. \"Last Order\", on the other hand, was released in Japan in a special DVD bundle package with \"Advent Children\". \"Last Order\" sold out quickly and was positively received by Western critics, though fan reaction was mixed over changes to established story scenes.\nTwo animated tie-ins for \"Final Fantasy XV\" were released as part of a larger multimedia project dubbed the \"Final Fantasy XV\" Universe. ' is a series of five 10-to-20-minute-long episodes developed by A-1 Pictures and Square Enix detailing the backstories of the main cast. ', a CGI film released prior to the game in Summer 2016, is set during the game's opening and follows new and secondary characters. In 2019, Square Enix released a short anime, produced by Satelight Inc, called \"Final Fantasy XV: Episode Ardyn \u2013 Prologue\" on their YouTube channel which acts as the background story for the final piece of DLC for \"Final Fantasy XV\" giving insight into Ardyn's past.\nSquare Enix also released \"\" in 2017, an 8-episode Japanese soap opera based, featuring a mix of live-action scenes and \"Final Fantasy XIV\" gameplay footage.\nAs of June 2019, Sony Pictures Television is working on a live-action adaptation of the series with Hivemind and Square Enix. Jason F. Brown, Sean Daniel and Dinesh Shamdasani for Hivemind are the producers while Ben Lustig and Jake Thornton were attached as writers and executive producers for the series.\nOther media.\nSeveral video games in the series have either been adapted into or have had spin-offs in the form of manga and novels. The first was the novelization of \"Final Fantasy II\" in 1989, which was followed by a manga adaptation of \"Final Fantasy III\" in 1992. Later years have seen an increase in the number of non-video game adaptations and spin-offs. \"Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within\" has been adapted into a novel, the spin-off game \"Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles\" has been adapted into a manga, and \"Final Fantasy XI\" had a novel and manga set in its continuity. Seven novellas based on the \"Final Fantasy VII\" universe have also been released. The \"Final Fantasy: Unlimited\" story was partially continued in novels and a manga after the anime series ended. The \"Final Fantasy X\" and \"XIII\" series have also had novellas and audio dramas released. \"Final Fantasy Tactics Advance\" has been adapted into a radio drama, and \"Final Fantasy: Unlimited\" has received a radio drama sequel.\nA trading card game named \"Final Fantasy Trading Card Game\" is produced by Square Enix and Hobby Japan, first released Japan in 2012 with an English version in 2016. The game has been compared to \"\", and a tournament circuit for the game also takes place.\nCommon elements.\nAlthough most \"Final Fantasy\" installments are independent, many gameplay elements recur throughout the series. Most games contain elements of fantasy and science fiction and feature recycled names often inspired from various cultures' history, languages and mythology, including Asian, European, and Middle-Eastern. Examples include weapon names like Excalibur and Masamune\u2014derived from Arthurian legend and the Japanese swordsmith Masamune respectively\u2014as well as the spell names Holy, Meteor, and Ultima. Beginning with \"Final Fantasy IV\", the main series adopted its current logo style that features the same typeface and an emblem designed by Japanese artist Yoshitaka Amano. The emblem relates to a game's plot and typically portrays a character or object in the story. Subsequent remakes of the first three games have replaced the previous logos with ones similar to the rest of the series.\nPlot and themes.\nThe central conflict in many \"Final Fantasy\" games focuses on a group of characters battling an evil, and sometimes ancient, antagonist that dominates the game's world. Stories frequently involve a sovereign state in rebellion, with the protagonists taking part in the rebellion. The heroes are often destined to defeat the evil, and occasionally gather as a direct result of the antagonist's malicious actions. Another staple of the series is the existence of two villains; the main villain is not always who it appears to be, as the primary antagonist may actually be subservient to another character or entity. The main antagonist introduced at the beginning of the game is not always the final enemy, and the characters must continue their quest beyond what appears to be the final fight.\nStories in the series frequently emphasize the internal struggles, passions, and tragedies of the characters, and the main plot often recedes into the background as the focus shifts to their personal lives. Games also explore relationships between characters, ranging from love to rivalry. Other recurring situations that drive the plot include amnesia, a hero corrupted by an evil force, mistaken identity, and self-sacrifice. Magical orbs and crystals are recurring in-game items that are frequently connected to the themes of the games' plots. Crystals often play a central role in the creation of the world, and a majority of the \"Final Fantasy\" games link crystals and orbs to the planet's life force. As such, control over these crystals drives the main conflict. The classical elements are also a recurring theme in the series related to the heroes, villains, and items. Other common plot and setting themes include the Gaia hypothesis, an apocalypse, and conflicts between advanced technology and nature.\nCharacters.\nThe series features a number of recurring character archetypes. Most famously, every game since \"Final Fantasy II\", including subsequent remakes of the original \"Final Fantasy\", features a character named Cid. Cid's appearance, personality, goals, and role in the game (non-playable ally, party member, villain) vary dramatically, but two characteristics many versions of Cid have in common are being a scientist or engineer, and being tied in some way to an airship the party eventually acquires. Every Cid has at least one of these two traits.\nBiggs and Wedge, inspired by two \"Star Wars\" characters of the same name, appear in numerous games as minor characters, sometimes as comic relief. The later games in the series feature several males with effeminate characteristics. Recurring creatures include Chocobos, Moogles, and Cactuars. Chocobos are large, often flightless birds that appear in several installments as a means of long-distance travel for characters. Moogles are white, stout creatures resembling teddy bears with wings and a single antenna. They serve different roles in games including mail delivery, weaponsmiths, party members, and saving the game. Cactuars are anthropomorphic cacti with \"haniwa\"-like faces presented in a running or dashing pose. They usually appear as recurring enemy units, and also as summoned allies or friendly non-player characters in certain titles. Chocobo and Moogle appearances are often accompanied by specific musical themes that have been arranged differently for separate games.\nGameplay.\nIn \"Final Fantasy\" games, players command a party of characters as they progress through the game's story by exploring the game world and defeating enemies. Enemies are typically encountered randomly through exploring, a trend which changed in \"Final Fantasy XI\" and \"XII\". The player issues combat orders\u2014like \"Fight\", \"Magic\", and \"Item\"\u2014to individual characters via a menu-driven interface while engaging in battles. Throughout the series, the games have used different battle systems. Prior to \"Final Fantasy XI\", battles were turn-based with the protagonists and antagonists on different sides of the battlefield. \"Final Fantasy IV\" introduced the \"Active Time Battle\" (ATB) system that augmented the turn-based nature with a perpetual time-keeping system. Designed by Hiroyuki Ito, it injected urgency and excitement into combat by requiring the player to act before an enemy attacks, and was used until \"Final Fantasy X\", which implemented the \"Conditional Turn-Based\" (CTB) system. This new system returned to the previous turn-based system, but added nuances to offer players more challenge. \"Final Fantasy XI\" adopted a real-time battle system where characters continuously act depending on the issued command. \"Final Fantasy XII\" continued this gameplay with the \"Active Dimension Battle\" system. \"Final Fantasy XIII\"'s combat system, designed by the same man who worked on \"X\", was meant to have an action-oriented feel, emulating the cinematic battles in \"Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children\". \"Final Fantasy XV\" introduces a new \"Open Combat\" system. Unlike previous battle systems in the franchise, the \"Open Combat\" system (OCS) allows players to take on a fully active battle scenario, allowing for free range attacks and movement, giving a much more fluid feel of combat. This system also incorporates a \"Tactical\" Option during battle, which pauses active battle to allow use of items.\nLike most RPGs, the \"Final Fantasy\" installments use an experience level system for character advancement, in which experience points are accumulated by killing enemies. Character classes, specific jobs that enable unique abilities for characters, are another recurring theme. Introduced in the first game, character classes have been used differently in each game. Some restrict a character to a single job to integrate it into the story, while other games feature dynamic job systems that allow the player to choose from multiple classes and switch throughout the game. Though used heavily in many games, such systems have become less prevalent in favor of characters that are more versatile; characters still match an archetype, but are able to learn skills outside their class.\nMagic is another common RPG element in the series. The method by which characters gain magic varies between installments, but is generally divided into classes organized by color: \"White magic\", which focuses on spells that assist teammates; \"Black magic\", which focuses on harming enemies; \"Red magic\", which is a combination of white and black magic, \"Blue magic\", which mimics enemy attacks; and \"Green magic\" which focuses on applying status effects to either allies or enemies. Other types of magic frequently appear such as \"Time magic\", focusing on the themes of time, space, and gravity; and \"Summoning magic\", which evokes legendary creatures to aid in battle and is a feature that has persisted since \"Final Fantasy III\". Summoned creatures are often referred to by names like \"Espers\" or \"Eidolons\" and have been inspired by mythologies from Arabic, Hindu, Norse, and Greek cultures.\nDifferent means of transportation have appeared through the series. The most common is the airship for long range travel, accompanied by chocobos for travelling short distances, but others include sea and land vessels. Following \"Final Fantasy VII\", more modern and futuristic vehicle designs have been included.\nDevelopment and history.\nOrigin.\nIn the mid-1980s, Square entered the Japanese video game industry with simple RPGs, racing games, and platformers for Nintendo's Famicom Disk System. In 1987, Square designer Hironobu Sakaguchi chose to create a new fantasy role-playing game for the cartridge-based NES, and drew inspiration from popular fantasy games: Enix's \"Dragon Quest\", Nintendo's \"The Legend of Zelda\", and Origin Systems's \"Ultima\" series. Though often attributed to the company allegedly facing bankruptcy, Sakaguchi explained that the game was his personal last-ditch effort in the game industry and that its title, \"Final Fantasy\", stemmed from his feelings at the time; had the game not sold well, he would have quit the business and gone back to college. Despite his explanation, publications have also attributed the name to the company's hopes that the project would solve its financial troubles. In 2015, Sakaguchi explained the name's origin: the team wanted a title that would abbreviate to \"FF\", which would sound good in Japanese. The name was originally going to be \"Fighting Fantasy\", but due to concerns over trademark conflicts with the roleplaying gamebook series of the same name, they needed to settle for something else. As the English word \"Final\" was well known in Japan, Sakaguchi settled on that. According to Sakaguchi, any title that created the \"FF\" abbreviation would have done.\nThe game indeed reversed Square's lagging fortunes, and it became the company's flagship franchise. Following the success, Square immediately developed a second installment. Because Sakaguchi assumed \"Final Fantasy\" would be a stand-alone game, its story was not designed to be expanded by a sequel. The developers instead chose to carry over only thematic similarities from its predecessor, while some of the gameplay elements, such as the character advancement system, were overhauled. This approach has continued throughout the series; each major \"Final Fantasy\" game features a new setting, a new cast of characters, and an upgraded battle system. Video game writer John Harris attributed the concept of reworking the game system of each installment to Nihon Falcom's \"Dragon Slayer\" series, with which Square was previously involved as a publisher. The company regularly released new games in the main series, but the time between the releases of \"XI\" (2002), \"XII\" (2006), and \"XIII\" (2009) were much longer than previous games. Following \"Final Fantasy XIV\", Square Enix released \"Final Fantasy\" games either annually or biennially. This switch was to mimic the development cycles of Western games in the \"Call of Duty\", \"Assassin's Creed\" and \"Battlefield\" series, as well as maintain fan-interest.\nDesign.\nFor the original \"Final Fantasy\", Sakaguchi required a larger production team than Square's previous games. He began crafting the game's story while experimenting with gameplay ideas. Once the gameplay system and game world size were established, Sakaguchi integrated his story ideas into the available resources. A different approach has been taken for subsequent games; the story is completed first and the game built around it. Designers have never been restricted by consistency, though most feel each game should have a minimum number of common elements. The development teams strive to create completely new worlds for each game, and avoid making new games too similar to previous ones. Game locations are conceptualized early in development and design details like building parts are fleshed out as a base for entire structures.\nThe first five games were directed by Sakaguchi, who also provided the original concepts. He drew inspiration for game elements from anime films by Hayao Miyazaki; series staples like the airships and chocobos are inspired by elements in \"Castle in the Sky\" and \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of the Wind\", respectively. Sakaguchi served as a producer for subsequent games until he left Square in 2001. Yoshinori Kitase took over directing the games until \"Final Fantasy VIII\", and has been followed by a new director for each new game. Hiroyuki Ito designed several gameplay systems, including \"Final Fantasy V\"'s \"Job System\", \"Final Fantasy VIII\"'s \"Junction System\" and the Active Time Battle concept, which was used from \"Final Fantasy IV\" until \"IX\". In designing the Active Time Battle system, Ito drew inspiration from Formula One racing; he thought it would be interesting if character types had different speeds after watching race cars pass each other. Ito also co-directed \"Final Fantasy VI\" with Kitase. Kenji Terada was the scenario writer for the first three games; Kitase took over as scenario writer for \"Final Fantasy V\" through \"VII\". Kazushige Nojima became the series' primary scenario writer from \"Final Fantasy VII\" until his resignation in October 2003; he has since formed his own company, Stellavista. Nojima partially or completely wrote the stories for \"Final Fantasy VII\", \"VIII\", \"X\", and its sequel \"X-2\". He also worked as the scenario writer for the spin-off series, \"Kingdom Hearts\". Daisuke Watanabe co-wrote the scenarios for \"Final Fantasy X\" and \"XII\", and was the main writer for the \"XIII\" games.\nArtistic design, including conceptual artworks and monster creations, was handled by Japanese artist Yoshitaka Amano from \"Final Fantasy\" through \"Final Fantasy VI\". Amano also handled title logo designs for all of the main series and the image illustrations from \"Final Fantasy VII\" onward. Koichi Ishii, who served as a graphic designer, created the character designs from \"Final Fantasy\" I to \"III\" while Kazuko Shibuya was responsible for adapting both the characters and monsters designs into pixel art. Shibuya went on to become the main pixel artist throughout the series while also doing the character designs for \"IV, V\" and most of the cast o\"f VI.\" Tetsuya Nomura was chosen to replace Amano because Nomura's designs were more adaptable to 3D graphics. He worked with the series from \"Final Fantasy VII\" through \"X\", then came back for \"XIII\", and for the basic design of \"XV\". For \"Final Fantasy IX\" character designs were handled by Shuk\u014d Murase, Toshiyuki Itahana, and Shin Nagasawa. For \"Final Fantasy XV\", Roberto Ferrari was responsible for the character design. Nomura is also the character designer of the \"Kingdom Hearts\" series, \"Compilation of Final Fantasy VII\", and \"Fabula Nova Crystallis: Final Fantasy\". Other designers include Nobuyoshi Mihara and Akihiko Yoshida. Mihara was the character designer for \"Final Fantasy XI\", and Yoshida served as character designer for \"Final Fantasy Tactics\", the Square-produced \"Vagrant Story\", and \"Final Fantasy XII\". For \"Final Fantasy XVI\", the character designs were handled by Kazuya Takahashi and Hiroshi Minagawa.\nGraphics and technology.\nBecause of graphical limitations, the first games on the NES feature small sprite representations of the leading party members on the main world screen. Battle screens use more detailed, full versions of characters in a side-view perspective. This practice was used until \"Final Fantasy VI\", which uses detailed versions for both screens. The NES sprites are 26\u00a0pixels high and use a color palette of 4\u00a0colors. 6\u00a0frames of animation are used to depict different character statuses like \"healthy\" and \"fatigued\". The SNES installments use updated graphics and effects, as well as higher quality audio than in previous games, but are otherwise similar to their predecessors in basic design. The SNES sprites are 2 pixels shorter, but have larger palettes and feature more animation frames: 11 colors and 40 frames respectively. The upgrade allowed designers to have characters be more detailed in appearance and express more emotions. The first game includes non-player characters (NPCs) the player could interact with, but they are mostly static in-game objects. Beginning with the second game, Square used predetermined pathways for NPCs to create more dynamic scenes that include comedy and drama.\nIn 1995, Square showed an interactive SGI technical demonstration of \"Final Fantasy VI\" for the then next generation of consoles. The demonstration used Silicon Graphics's prototype Nintendo 64 workstations to create 3D graphics. Fans believed the demo was of a new \"Final Fantasy\" game for the Nintendo 64 console. 1997 saw the release of \"Final Fantasy VII\" for the Sony PlayStation. The switch was due to a dispute with Nintendo over its use of faster but more expensive cartridges, as opposed to the slower and cheaper, but much higher capacity compact discs used on rival systems. \"VII\" introduced 3D graphics with fully pre-rendered backgrounds. It was because of this switch to 3D that a CD-ROM format was chosen over a cartridge format. The switch also led to increased production costs and a greater subdivision of the creative staff for \"VII\" and subsequent 3D games in the series.\nStarting with \"Final Fantasy VIII\", the series adopted a more photo-realistic look. Like \"VII\", full motion video (FMV) sequences would have video playing in the background, with the polygonal characters composited on top. \"Final Fantasy IX\" returned to the more stylized design of earlier games in the series, although it still maintained, and in many cases slightly upgraded, most of the graphical techniques used in the previous two games. \"Final Fantasy X\" was released on the PlayStation 2, and used the more powerful hardware to render graphics in real-time instead of using pre-rendered material to obtain a more dynamic look; the game features full 3D environments, rather than having 3D character models move about pre-rendered backgrounds. It is also the first \"Final Fantasy\" game to feature voice acting, occurring throughout the majority of the game, even with many minor characters. This aspect added a whole new dimension of depth to the character's reactions, emotions, and development.\nTaking a temporary divergence, \"Final Fantasy XI\" used the PlayStation 2's online capabilities as an MMORPG. Initially released for the PlayStation 2 with a PC port arriving six months later, \"XI\" was also released on the Xbox 360 nearly four years after its original release in Japan. This was the first \"Final Fantasy\" game to use a free rotating camera. \"Final Fantasy XII\" was released in 2006 for the PlayStation 2 and uses only half as many polygons as \"Final Fantasy X\", in exchange for more advanced textures and lighting. It also retains the freely rotating camera from \"XI\". \"Final Fantasy XIII\" and \"XIV\" both make use of Crystal Tools, a middleware engine developed by Square Enix.\nMusic.\n\"Final Fantasy\" games feature a variety of music, and frequently reuse themes. Most of the games open with a piece called \"Prelude\", which has evolved from a simple, 2-voice arpeggio in the early games to a complex, melodic arrangement in recent installments. Victories in combat are often accompanied by a victory fanfare, a theme that has become one of the most recognized pieces of music in the series. The basic theme that accompanies Chocobo appearances has been rearranged in a different musical style for most installments. Recurring secret bosses such as Gilgamesh are also used as opportunities to revive their musical themes.\nA theme known as the \"Final Fantasy Main Theme\" or \"March\", originally featured in the first game, often accompanies the ending credits. Although leitmotifs are common in the more character-driven installments, theme music is typically reserved for main characters and recurring plot elements.\nNobuo Uematsu was the primary composer of the \"Final Fantasy\" series until his resignation from Square Enix in November 2004. Other notable composers who have worked on main entries in the series include Masashi Hamauzu, Hitoshi Sakimoto, and Yoko Shimomura. Uematsu was allowed to create much of the music with little direction from the production staff. Sakaguchi, however, would request pieces to fit specific game scenes including battles and exploring different areas of the game world. Once a game's major scenarios were completed, Uematsu would begin writing the music based on the story, characters, and accompanying artwork. He started with a game's main theme, and developed other pieces to match its style. In creating character themes, Uematsu read the game's scenario to determine the characters' personality. He would also ask the scenario writer for more details to scenes he was unsure about. Technical limitations were prevalent in earlier games; Sakaguchi would sometimes instruct Uematsu to only use specific notes. It was not until \"Final Fantasy IV\" on the SNES that Uematsu was able to add more subtlety to the music.\nReception.\nOverall, the \"Final Fantasy\" series has been critically acclaimed and commercially successful, though each installment has seen different levels of success. The series has seen a steady increase in total sales; it sold 25 million units by 1999, and reached 100 million units in 2011. By March 2025, the series reached cumulative global physical and digital sales of 200 million units.\nSeveral games within the series have become best-selling games. At the end of 2007, the seventh, eighth, and ninth best-selling RPGs were \"Final Fantasy VII\", \"VIII\", and \"X\" respectively. The original \"Final Fantasy VII\" has sold over 14.4 million copies worldwide, earning it the position of the best-selling \"Final Fantasy\" game. Within two days of \"Final Fantasy VIII\"'s North American release on September 9, 1999, it became the top-selling video game in the United States, a position it held for more than three weeks. \"Final Fantasy X\" sold over 1.4 million Japanese units in pre-orders alone, which set a record for the fastest-selling console RPG. The MMORPG, \"Final Fantasy XI\", reached over 200,000 active daily players in March 2006 and had reached over half a million subscribers by July 2007. \"Final Fantasy XII\" sold more than 1.7 million copies in its first week in Japan. By November 6, 2006\u2014one week after its release\u2014\"XII\" had shipped approximately 1.5 million copies in North America. \"Final Fantasy XIII\" became the fastest-selling game in the franchise, and sold one million units on its first day of sale in Japan. \"Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn\", in comparison to its predecessor, was a runaway success, originally suffering from servers being overcrowded, and eventually gaining over one million unique subscribers within two months of its launch.\nThe series has received critical acclaim for the quality of its visuals and soundtracks. In 1996, \"Next Generation\" ranked the series collectively as the 17th best game of all time, speaking very highly of its graphics, music and stories. In 1999, \"Next Generation\" listed the \"Final Fantasy\" series as number 16 on their \"Top 50 Games of All Time\", commenting that \"by pairing state-of-the-art technology with memorable, sometimes shamelessly melodramatic storylines, the series has successfully outlasted its competitors [...] and improved with each new installation\". It was awarded a star on the Walk of Game in 2006, making it the first franchise to win a star on the event (other winners were individual games, not franchises). \"WalkOfGame.com\" commented that the series has sought perfection as well as having been a risk taker in innovation. In 2006, \"GameFAQs\" held a contest for the best video game series ever, with \"Final Fantasy\" finishing as the runner-up to \"The Legend of Zelda\". In a 2008 public poll held by The Game Group plc, \"Final Fantasy\" was voted the best game series, with five games appearing in their \"Greatest Games of All Time\" list.\nMany \"Final Fantasy\" games have been included in various lists of top games. Several games have been listed on multiple IGN \"Top Games\" lists. Twelve games were listed on \"Famitsu\"'s 2006 \"Top 100 Favorite Games of All Time\", four of which were in the top ten, with \"Final Fantasy X\" and \"VII\" coming first and second, respectively. The series holds seven Guinness World Records in the \"Guinness World Records Gamer's Edition 2008\", which include the \"Most Games in an RPG Series\" (13 main games, seven enhanced games, and 32 spin-off games), the \"Longest Development Period\" (the production of \"Final Fantasy XII\" took five years), and the \"Fastest-Selling Console RPG in a Single Day\" (\"Final Fantasy X\"). The 2009 edition listed two games from the series among the top 50 consoles games: \"Final Fantasy XII\" at number 8 and \"VII\" at number 20. In 2018, \"Final Fantasy VII\" was inducted as a member of the World Video Game Hall of Fame.\nHowever, the series has garnered some criticism. \"IGN\" has commented that the menu system used by the games is a major detractor for many and is a \"significant reason why they haven't touched the series\". The site has also heavily criticized the use of random encounters in the series' battle systems. \"IGN\" further stated that the various attempts to bring the series into film and animation have either been unsuccessful, unremarkable, or did not live up to the standards of the games. In 2007, \"Edge\" criticized the series for a number of related games that include the phrase \"Final Fantasy\" in their titles, which are considered inferior to previous games. It also commented that with the departure of Hironobu Sakaguchi, the series might be in danger of growing stale.\nSeveral individual \"Final Fantasy\" games have garnered extra attention; some for their positive reception and others for their negative reception. \"Final Fantasy VII\" topped \"GamePro's\" \"26 Best RPGs of All Time\" list, as well as \"GameFAQs\"' \"Best Game Ever\" audience polls in 2004 and 2005. Despite the success of \"VII\", it is sometimes criticized as being overrated. In 2003, \"GameSpy\" listed it as the seventh most overrated game of all time, while \"IGN\" presented views from both sides. \"\" shipped 392,000 units in its first week of release, but received review scores that were much lower than that of other \"Final Fantasy\" games. A delayed, negative review after the Japanese release of \"Dirge of Cerberus\" from Japanese gaming magazine \"Famitsu\" hinted at a controversy between the magazine and Square Enix. Though \"Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within\" was praised for its visuals, the plot was criticized and the film was considered a box office bomb. \"Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles\" for the GameCube received overall positive review scores, but reviews stated that the use of Game Boy Advances as controllers was a big detractor. The predominantly negative reception of the original version of \"Final Fantasy XIV\" caused then-president Yoichi Wada to issue an official apology during a Tokyo press conference, stating that the brand had been \"greatly damaged\" by the game's reception.\nRankings and aggregators.\nVarious video game publications have created rankings of the mainline \"Final Fantasy\" games. In the table below, the lower the number given, the better the game is in the view of the respective publication. By way of comparison, the ratings provided by \"Famitsu\" magazine and the review aggregator \"Metacritic\" are also given; in these rows, higher numbers indicate better reviews. Note that \"Metacritic\" ratings up until \"Final Fantasy VII\" largely represent retrospective reviews from online websites years after their initial release, rather than contemporary reviews from video game magazines at the time of their initial release.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nLegacy.\n\"Final Fantasy\" has been influential in the history of video games and game mechanics. \"Final Fantasy IV\" is considered a milestone for the genre, introducing a dramatic storyline with a strong emphasis on character development and personal relationships. In 1992, Nintendo's Shigeru Miyamoto noted the impact of \"Final Fantasy\" on Japanese role-playing games, stating \"Final Fantasy\"'s \"interactive cinematic approach\" with an emphasis on \"presentation and graphics\" was gradually becoming \"the most common style\" of Japanese RPG at the time. \"Final Fantasy VII\", having been the first title of the series to be officially released in the PAL territories of Europe and Oceania, is credited as having the largest industry impact of the series, and with allowing console role-playing games to gain global mass-market appeal. \"VII\" is considered to be one of the most important and influential video games in the series.\nThe series affected Square's business on several levels. The commercial failure of \"Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within\" resulted in hesitation and delays from Enix during merger discussions with Square. Square's decision to produce games exclusively for the Sony PlayStation\u2014a move followed by Enix's decision with the \"Dragon Quest\" series\u2014severed their relationship with Nintendo. \"Final Fantasy\" games were absent from Nintendo consoles, specifically the Nintendo 64, for seven years. Critics attribute the switch of strong third-party games like the \"Final Fantasy\" and \"Dragon Quest\" games to Sony's PlayStation, and away from the Nintendo 64, as one of the reasons behind PlayStation being the more successful of the two consoles. The release of the Nintendo GameCube, which used optical disc media, in 2001 caught the attention of Square. To produce games for the system, Square created the shell company The Game Designers Studio and released \"Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles\", which spawned its own metaseries within the main franchise. \"Final Fantasy XI\"'s lack of an online method of subscription cancellation prompted the creation of legislation in Illinois that requires internet gaming services to provide such a method to the state's residents.\nThe series' popularity has resulted in its appearance and reference in numerous facets of popular culture like anime, TV series, and webcomics. Music from the series has permeated into different areas of culture. \"Final Fantasy IV\"'s \"Theme of Love\" was integrated into the curriculum of Japanese school children and has been performed live by orchestras and metal bands. In 2003, Uematsu co-founded The Black Mages, an instrumental rock group independent of Square that has released albums of arranged \"Final Fantasy\" tunes. Bronze medalists Alison Bartosik and Anna Kozlova performed their synchronized swimming routine at the 2004 Summer Olympics to music from \"Final Fantasy VIII\". Many of the soundtracks have also been released for sale. Numerous companion books, which normally provide in-depth game information, have been published. In Japan, they are published by Square and are called \"Ultimania\" books.\nThe series has inspired numerous game developers. \"Fable\" creator Peter Molyneux considers \"Final Fantasy VII\" to be the RPG that \"defined the genre\" for him. BioWare founder Greg Zeschuk described \"Final Fantasy VII\" as \"the first really emotionally engaging game\" he played and said it had \"a big impact\" on BioWare's work. \"The Witcher 3\" senior environmental artist Jonas Mattsson cited \"Final Fantasy\" as \"a huge influence\" and said it was \"the first RPG\" he played through. \"Mass Effect\" art director Derek Watts cited \"Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within\" as a major influence on the visual design and art direction of the series. BioWare senior product manager David Silverman cited \"Final Fantasy XII\"'s gambit system as an influence on the gameplay of \"\". Ubisoft Toronto creative director Maxime Beland cited the original \"Final Fantasy\" as a major influence on him. Media Molecule's Constantin Jupp credited \"Final Fantasy VII\" with getting him into game design. Tim Schafer also cited \"Final Fantasy VII\" as one of his favourite games.\nThe \"Final Fantasy\" fandom includes large fan organizations like Final Fantasy Union. In 2023, Final Fantasy Union collaborated with British indie publisher Lost in Cult on the sixth volume of the imprint's art journal, \"Lock-On\", which focused on the art of \"Final Fantasy\" and \"Legend of Zelda\" and featured an exclusive cover illustration of Terra Branford by Yoshitaka Amano alongside interviews with Hironobu Sakaguchi, Nobuo Uematsu, and Matt Mercer.\nIn October 2007, a fan-made web series of CG action films called \"Dead Fantasy\" was created by late web-based animator and writer, Monty Oum. \"Dead Fantasy\" featured \"Final Fantasy\" characters competing against \"Dead or Alive\" characters in battle royale-style brawls.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10975", "revid": "50874983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10975", "title": "Fatty acid", "text": "Carboxylic acid\nIn chemistry, particularly in biochemistry, a fatty acid is a carboxylic acid with an aliphatic chain, which is either saturated or unsaturated. Most naturally occurring fatty acids have an unbranched chain of an even number of carbon atoms, from 4 to 28. Fatty acids are a major component of the lipids (up to 70% by weight) in some species such as microalgae but in some other organisms are not found in their standalone form, but instead exist as three main classes of esters: triglycerides, phospholipids, and cholesteryl esters. In any of these forms, fatty acids are both important dietary sources of fuel for animals and important structural components for cells.\nHistory.\nThe concept of fatty acid (\"acide gras\") was introduced in 1813 by Michel Eug\u00e8ne Chevreul, though he initially used some variant terms: \"graisse acide\" and \"acide huileux\" (\"acid fat\" and \"oily acid\").\nTypes of fatty acids.\nFatty acids are classified in many ways: by length, by saturation vs unsaturation, by even vs odd carbon content, and by linear vs branched.\nSaturated fatty acids.\nSaturated fatty acids have no C=C double bonds. They have the formula CH3(CH2)nCOOH, where \"n\" is some positive integer. An important saturated fatty acid is stearic acid (\"n\"\u00a0=\u00a018), which when neutralized with sodium hydroxide is the most common form of soap.\nUnsaturated fatty acids.\nUnsaturated fatty acids have one or more C=C double bonds. The C=C double bonds can give either \"cis\" or \"trans\" isomers.\nIn most naturally occurring unsaturated fatty acids, each double bond has three (n\u22123), six (n\u22126), or nine (n\u22129) carbon atoms after it, and all double bonds have a cis configuration. Most fatty acids in the \"trans\" configuration (trans fats) are not found in nature and are the result of human processing (e.g., hydrogenation). Some trans fatty acids also occur naturally in the milk and meat of ruminants (such as cattle and sheep). They are produced, by fermentation, in the rumen of these animals. They are also found in dairy products from milk of ruminants, and may be also found in breast milk of women who obtained them from their diet.\nThe geometric differences between the various types of unsaturated fatty acids, as well as between saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, play an important role in biological processes, and in the construction of biological structures (such as cell membranes).\nEven- vs odd-chained fatty acids.\nMost naturally occurring fatty acids are even-chained, e.g. stearic (C18) and oleic (C18), meaning they are composed of an even number of carbon atoms; odd-chained fatty acids (OCFA) also occur, albeit far less frequently. The most common OCFA are the saturated C15 and C17 derivatives, pentadecanoic acid and heptadecanoic acid respectively, which are found in dairy products. On a molecular level, OCFAs are biosynthesized and metabolized slightly differently from the even-chained relatives.\nBranching.\nMost common fatty acids are straight-chain compounds, with no additional carbon atoms bonded as side groups to the main hydrocarbon chain. Branched-chain fatty acids contain one or more methyl groups bonded to the hydrocarbon chain.\nNomenclature.\nCarbon atom numbering.\nMost naturally occurring fatty acids have an unbranched chain of carbon atoms, with a carboxyl group (\u2013COOH) at one end, and a methyl group (\u2013CH3) at the other end.\nThe position of each carbon atom in the backbone of a fatty acid is usually indicated by counting from 1 at the \u2212COOH end. Carbon number \"x\" is often abbreviated C-\"x\" (or sometimes C\"x\"), with \"x\" = 1, 2, 3, etc. This is the numbering scheme recommended by the IUPAC.\nAnother convention uses letters of the Greek alphabet in sequence, starting with the first carbon \"after\" the carboxyl group. Thus carbon \u03b1 (alpha) is C-2, carbon \u03b2 (beta) is C-3, and so forth.\nAlthough fatty acids can be of diverse lengths, in this second convention the last carbon in the chain is always labelled as \u03c9 (omega), which is the last letter in the Greek alphabet. A third numbering convention counts the carbons from that end, using the labels \"\u03c9\", \"\u03c9\u22121\", \"\u03c9\u22122\". Alternatively, the label \"\u03c9\u2212\"x\"\" is written \"n\u2212\"x\"\", where the \"n\" is meant to represent the number of carbons in the chain.\nIn either numbering scheme, the position of a double bond in a fatty acid chain is always specified by giving the label of the carbon closest to the carboxyl end. Thus, in an 18 carbon fatty acid, a double bond between C-12 (or \u03c9\u22126) and C-13 (or \u03c9\u22125) is said to be \"at\" position C-12 or \u03c9\u22126. The IUPAC naming of the acid, such as \"octadec-12-enoic acid\" (or the more pronounceable variant \"12-octadecanoic acid\") is always based on the \"C\" numbering.\nThe notation \u0394\"x\",\"y\"... is traditionally used to specify a fatty acid with double bonds at positions \"x\",\"y\"... (The capital Greek letter \"\u0394\" (delta) corresponds to Roman \"D\", for Double bond). Thus, for example, the 20-carbon arachidonic acid is \u03945,8,11,14, meaning that it has double bonds between carbons 5 and 6, 8 and 9, 11 and 12, and 14 and 15.\nIn the context of human diet and fat metabolism, unsaturated fatty acids are often classified by the position of the double bond closest between to the \u03c9 carbon (only), even in the case of multiple double bonds such as the essential fatty acids. Thus linoleic acid (18 carbons, \u03949,12), \u03b3-linolenic acid (18-carbon, \u03946,9,12), and arachidonic acid (20-carbon, \u03945,8,11,14) are all classified as \"\u03c9\u22126\" fatty acids; meaning that their formula ends with \u2013CH=CH\u2013CH2\u2013CH2\u2013CH2\u2013CH2\u2013CH3.\nFatty acids with an odd number of carbon atoms are called odd-chain fatty acids, whereas the rest are even-chain fatty acids. The difference is relevant to gluconeogenesis.\nNaming of fatty acids.\nThe following table describes the most common systems of naming fatty acids.\nFree fatty acids.\nWhen circulating in the plasma (plasma fatty acids), not in their ester, fatty acids are known as non-esterified fatty acids (NEFAs) or free fatty acids (FFAs). FFAs are always bound to a transport protein, such as albumin.\nFFAs also form from triglyceride food oils and fats by hydrolysis, contributing to the characteristic rancid odor. An analogous process happens in biodiesel with risk of part corrosion.\nProduction.\nIndustrial.\nFatty acids are usually produced industrially by the hydrolysis of triglycerides, with the removal of glycerol (see oleochemicals). Phospholipids represent another source. Some fatty acids are produced synthetically by hydrocarboxylation of alkenes.\nBy animals.\nIn animals, fatty acids are formed from carbohydrates predominantly in the liver, adipose tissue, and the mammary glands during lactation.\nCarbohydrates are converted into pyruvate by glycolysis as the first important step in the conversion of carbohydrates into fatty acids. Pyruvate is then decarboxylated to form acetyl-CoA in the mitochondrion. However, this acetyl CoA needs to be transported into cytosol where the synthesis of fatty acids occurs. This cannot occur directly. To obtain cytosolic acetyl-CoA, citrate (produced by the condensation of acetyl-CoA with oxaloacetate) is removed from the citric acid cycle and carried across the inner mitochondrial membrane into the cytosol. There it is cleaved by ATP citrate lyase into acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate. The oxaloacetate is returned to the mitochondrion as malate. The cytosolic acetyl-CoA is carboxylated by acetyl-CoA carboxylase into malonyl-CoA, the first committed step in the synthesis of fatty acids.\nMalonyl-CoA is then involved in a repeating series of reactions that lengthens the growing fatty acid chain by two carbons at a time. Almost all natural fatty acids, therefore, have even numbers of carbon atoms. When synthesis is complete the free fatty acids are nearly always combined with glycerol (three fatty acids to one glycerol molecule) to form triglycerides, the main storage form of fatty acids, and thus of energy in animals. However, fatty acids are also important components of the phospholipids that form the phospholipid bilayers out of which all the membranes of the cell are constructed (the cell wall, and the membranes that enclose all the organelles within the cells, such as the nucleus, the mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, and the Golgi apparatus).\nThe \"uncombined fatty acids\" or \"free fatty acids\" found in the circulation of animals come from the breakdown (or lipolysis) of stored triglycerides. Because they are insoluble in water, these fatty acids are transported bound to plasma albumin. The levels of \"free fatty acids\" in the blood are limited by the availability of albumin binding sites. They can be taken up from the blood by all cells that have mitochondria (with the exception of the cells of the central nervous system). Fatty acids can only be broken down in mitochondria, by means of beta-oxidation followed by further combustion in the citric acid cycle to CO2 and water. Cells in the central nervous system, although they possess mitochondria, cannot take free fatty acids up from the blood, as the blood\u2013brain barrier is impervious to most free fatty acids, excluding short-chain fatty acids and medium-chain fatty acids. These cells have to manufacture their own fatty acids from carbohydrates, as described above, in order to produce and maintain the phospholipids of their cell membranes, and those of their organelles.\nVariation between animal species.\nStudies on the cell membranes of mammals and reptiles discovered that mammalian cell membranes are composed of a higher proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids (DHA, omega\u22123 fatty acid) than reptiles. Studies on bird fatty acid composition have noted similar proportions to mammals but with 1/3rd less omega\u22123 fatty acids as compared to omega\u22126 for a given body size. This fatty acid composition results in a more fluid cell membrane but also one that is permeable to various ions ( &amp; ), resulting in cell membranes that are more costly to maintain. This maintenance cost has been argued to be one of the key causes for the high metabolic rates and concomitant warm-bloodedness of mammals and birds. However polyunsaturation of cell membranes may also occur in response to chronic cold temperatures as well. In fish increasingly cold environments lead to increasingly high cell membrane content of both monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids, to maintain greater membrane fluidity (and functionality) at the lower temperatures.\nFatty acids in dietary fats.\nThe following table gives the fatty acid, vitamin E and cholesterol composition of some common dietary fats.\nReactions of fatty acids.\nFatty acids exhibit reactions like other carboxylic acids, i.e. they undergo esterification and acid-base reactions.\nTransesterification.\nAll fatty acids transesterify. Typically, transesterification is practiced in the conversion of fats to fatty acid methyl esters. These esters are used for biodiesel. They are also hydrogenated to give fatty alcohols. Even vinyl esters can be made by transesterification using vinyl acetate.\nAcid-base reactions.\nFatty acids do not show a great variation in their acidities, as indicated by their respective p\"K\"a. Nonanoic acid, for example, has a p\"K\"a of 4.96, being only slightly weaker than acetic acid (4.76). As the chain length increases, the solubility of the fatty acids in water decreases, so that the longer-chain fatty acids have minimal effect on the pH of an aqueous solution. Near neutral pH, fatty acids exist at their conjugate bases, i.e. oleate, etc.\nSolutions of fatty acids in ethanol can be titrated with sodium hydroxide solution using phenolphthalein as an indicator. This analysis is used to determine the free fatty acid content of fats; i.e., the proportion of the triglycerides that have been hydrolyzed.\nNeutralization of fatty acids, like saponification, is a widely practiced route to metallic soaps.\nHydrogenation and hardening.\nHydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids is widely practiced. Typical conditions involve 2.0\u20133.0 MPa of H2 pressure, 150\u00a0\u00b0C, and nickel supported on silica as a catalyst. This treatment affords saturated fatty acids. The extent of hydrogenation is indicated by the iodine number. Hydrogenated fatty acids are less prone toward rancidification. Since the saturated fatty acids are higher melting than the unsaturated precursors, the process is called hardening. Related technology is used to convert vegetable oils into margarine. The hydrogenation of triglycerides (vs fatty acids) is advantageous because the carboxylic acids degrade the nickel catalysts, affording nickel soaps. During partial hydrogenation, unsaturated fatty acids can be isomerized from \"cis\" to \"trans\" configuration.\nMore forcing hydrogenation, i.e. using higher pressures of H2 and higher temperatures, converts fatty acids into fatty alcohols. Fatty alcohols are, however, more easily produced from simpler fatty acid esters, like the fatty acid methyl esters (\"FAME\"s).\nDecarboxylation.\nKetonic decarboxylation is a method useful for producing symmetrical ketones from carboxylic acids. The process involves reactions of the carboxylic acid with an inorganic base. Stearone is prepared by heating magnesium stearate.\nChemistry of saturated vs unsaturated acids.\nThe reactivity of saturated fatty acids is usually associated with the carboxylic acid or the adjacent methylene group By conversion to their acid chlorides, they can be converted to the symmetrical fatty ketone laurone (). Treatment with sulfur trioxide gives the \u03b1-sulfonic acids.\nThe reactivity of unsaturated fatty acids is often dominated by the site of unsaturation. These reactions are the basis of ozonolysis, hydrogenation, and the iodine number. Ozonolysis (degradation by ozone) is practiced in the production of azelaic acid ((CH2)7(CO2H)2) from oleic acid.\nCirculation.\nDigestion and intake.\nShort- and medium-chain fatty acids are absorbed directly into the blood via intestine capillaries and travel through the portal vein just as other absorbed nutrients do. However, long-chain fatty acids are not directly released into the intestinal capillaries. Instead they are absorbed into the fatty walls of the intestine villi and reassemble again into triglycerides. The triglycerides are coated with cholesterol and protein (protein coat) into a compound called a chylomicron.\nFrom within the cell, the chylomicron is released into a lymphatic capillary called a lacteal, which merges into larger lymphatic vessels. It is transported via the lymphatic system and the thoracic duct up to a location near the heart (where the arteries and veins are larger). The thoracic duct empties the chylomicrons into the bloodstream via the left subclavian vein. At this point the chylomicrons can transport the triglycerides to tissues where they are stored or metabolized for energy.\nMetabolism.\nFatty acids are broken down to CO2 and water by the intra-cellular mitochondria through beta oxidation and the citric acid cycle. In the final step (oxidative phosphorylation), reactions with oxygen release a lot of energy, captured in the form of large quantities of ATP. Many cell types can use either glucose or fatty acids for this purpose, but fatty acids release more energy per gram. Fatty acids (provided either by ingestion or by drawing on triglycerides stored in fatty tissues) are distributed to cells to serve as a fuel for muscular contraction and general metabolism.\nEssential fatty acids.\nFatty acids that are required for good health but cannot be made in sufficient quantity from other substrates, and therefore must be obtained from food, are called essential fatty acids. There are two series of essential fatty acids: one has a double bond three carbon atoms away from the methyl end; the other has a double bond six carbon atoms away from the methyl end. Humans lack the ability to introduce double bonds in fatty acids beyond carbons 9 and 10, as counted from the carboxylic acid side. Two essential fatty acids are linoleic acid (LA) and alpha-linolenic acid (ALA). These fatty acids are widely distributed in plant oils. The human body has a limited ability to convert ALA into the longer-chain omega-3 fatty acids \u2014 eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), which can also be obtained from fish. Omega\u22123 and omega\u22126 fatty acids are biosynthetic precursors to endocannabinoids with antinociceptive, anxiolytic, and neurogenic properties.\nDistribution.\nBlood fatty acids adopt distinct forms in different stages in the blood circulation. They are taken in through the intestine in chylomicrons, but also exist in very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) and low density lipoproteins (LDL) after processing in the liver. In addition, when released from adipocytes, fatty acids exist in the blood as free fatty acids.\nIt is proposed that the blend of fatty acids exuded by mammalian skin, together with lactic acid and pyruvic acid, is distinctive and enables animals with a keen sense of smell to differentiate individuals.\nSkin.\nThe stratum corneum \u2013 the outermost layer of the epidermis \u2013 is composed of terminally differentiated and enucleated corneocytes within a lipid matrix. Together with cholesterol and ceramides, free fatty acids form a water-impermeable barrier that prevents evaporative water loss. Generally, the epidermal lipid matrix is composed of an equimolar mixture of ceramides (about 50% by weight), cholesterol (25%), and free fatty acids (15%). Saturated fatty acids 16 and 18 carbons in length are the dominant types in the epidermis, while unsaturated fatty acids and saturated fatty acids of various other lengths are also present. The relative abundance of the different fatty acids in the epidermis is dependent on the body site the skin is covering. There are also characteristic epidermal fatty acid alterations that occur in psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, and other inflammatory conditions.\nAnalysis.\nThe chemical analysis of fatty acids in lipids typically begins with an interesterification step that breaks down their original esters (triglycerides, waxes, phospholipids etc.) and converts them to methyl esters, which are then separated by gas chromatography or analyzed by gas chromatography and mid-infrared spectroscopy.\nSeparation of unsaturated isomers is possible by silver ion complemented thin-layer chromatography. Other separation techniques include high-performance liquid chromatography (with short columns packed with silica gel with bonded phenylsulfonic acid groups whose hydrogen atoms have been exchanged for silver ions). The role of silver lies in its ability to form complexes with unsaturated compounds.\nIndustrial uses.\nFatty acids are mainly used in the production of soap, both for cosmetic purposes and, in the case of metallic soaps, as lubricants. Fatty acids are also converted, via their methyl esters, to fatty alcohols and fatty amines, which are precursors to surfactants, detergents, and lubricants. Other applications include their use as emulsifiers, texturizing agents, wetting agents, anti-foam agents, or stabilizing agents.\nEsters of fatty acids with simpler alcohols (such as methyl-, ethyl-, n-propyl-, isopropyl- and butyl esters) are used as emollients in cosmetics and other personal care products and as synthetic lubricants. Esters of fatty acids with more complex alcohols, such as sorbitol, ethylene glycol, diethylene glycol, and polyethylene glycol are consumed in food, or used for personal care and water treatment, or used as synthetic lubricants or fluids for metal working.\nFatty acids and their derivatives like dimer acids have also been used by scientists to prepare polyurethane coatings of bio-based or bio-derived coatings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10977", "revid": "39618856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10977", "title": "Fearless (1993 film)", "text": "1993 American drama film by Peter Weir\nFearless is a 1993 American drama film directed by Peter Weir and starring Jeff Bridges, Isabella Rossellini, Rosie Perez and John Turturro. It was written by Rafael Yglesias, adapted from his novel of the same name.\nRosie Perez was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role as Carla Rodrigo. The film was also entered into the 44th Berlin International Film Festival. Jeff Bridges's role as Max Klein is widely regarded as one of the best performances of his career. The film's soundtrack features part of the first movement of Henryk G\u00f3recki's Symphony No. 3, subtitled \"Symphony of Sorrowful Songs\". The film's screenwriter was inspired to write the script after he was in a car accident. Yglesias began writing the story after reading about United Airlines Flight 232, that crashed in Sioux City, Iowa, in 1989.\nPlot.\nMax Klein survives an airline crash. The plane plummets, but he is strangely calm. This calm enables him to dispel fear in the flight cabin. He sits next to Byron Hummel, a young boy flying alone. Flight attendants move through the cabin, telling another passenger, Carla Rodrigo, traveling with an infant, to hold the child in her lap as the plane plummets out of control, while telling other passengers to buckle into their seats. Max was telling his business partner, Jeff Gordon, of his fear of flying as they took off.\nIn the aftermath of the crash, most passengers died. Among the few survivors, most are terribly injured but Max is unhurt. The crash site is chaotic, filled with first responders and other emergency personnel. Focusing on the survivors, a team of investigators from the FAA and the airline conduct interviews. Max is repelled by all the chaos and disgusted by the investigators wanting to interview him.\nMax rents a car and starts driving home. Along the way, he visits his high school girlfriend Alison, whom he has not seen for 20 years. At the restaurant, Alison is surprised to see Max eating strawberries, as he is allergic to them. He grins, then finishes them without an allergic reaction.\nThe next morning, Max is accosted by FBI investigators. They question why he chose not to contact his family to tell them he is fine. The airline representative offers Max train tickets to return home, but he asks for airline tickets, as he no longer fears air travel. The airline books him on the flight. They seat him next to Dr. Bill Perlman, the airline's psychiatrist.\nDr. Perlman annoyingly tags behind Max back to his home, prodding him for information about the crash. Max snaps back at the psychiatrist rudely, to be rid of him. Max's wife Laura Klein notices his strange behavior and that he seems somehow changed. Max's late business partner's wife Nan Gordon asks about Jeff's last moments. Max says Jeff died in the crash.\nThe media call Max \"The Good Samaritan\" in news reports. The boy Max sat next to, Byron, publicly thanks him in television interviews. For the way he comforted passengers while the plane fell out of control during the crash, Max is considered a hero.\nMax avoids the press and becomes distant from Laura and his son Jonah. His persona is radically changed, and he is preoccupied with his new perspective on life following the near-death experience. Max begins drawing abstract pictures of the crash. As he survived without injury, he thinks himself invulnerable to death.\nBecause of his confidence, Dr. Perlman encourages Max to meet with fellow survivor Carla Rodrigo, whose infant was held in her lap while the plane fell. She struggles with survivor's guilt, and is traumatized for not holding onto him tightly enough, although she was following the flight attendant's instructions.\nMax and Carla develop a close friendship. He helps her to get past the trauma, to free herself from guilt, deliberately crashing his car to show that it was physically impossible for any person to hold onto anything due to the forces of the crash.\nAttorney Steven Brillstein encourages Max to exaggerate testimony, to maximize the settlement offer from the airline. He reluctantly agrees when he is confronted with Nan's financial predicament as a widow.\nCognitive dissonance spurs Max to a panic attack. He runs out of the office, to the roof of the building. He climbs onto the roof's edge. As Max stands on the ledge, looking down at the streets below, his panic subsides. He rejoices in fearlessness. Laura finds Max on the ledge. He is spinning on it, with his overcoat billowing across his face.\nBrillstein arrives at the Kleins' to celebrate the airline's settlement offer, bringing a fruit basket. Max eats one of the strawberries. This time he experiences an allergic reaction. Max is resuscitated by Laura and survives. He recovers his emotional connection to his family, to the world and to the reality of yet another chance at life.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Jeff Bridges as Max Klein\nProduction.\nWinona Ryder auditioned for the film but was rejected because Bridges felt she was too young to portray his love-interest.\nAesthetic elements.\nA book containing the painting \"The Ascent into the Empyrean\" by Hieronymus Bosch is shown, and it is said that the dying go into the light of heaven \"naked and alone\". Near the finale as Max lies on the ground, he relives moving from the fuselage of the aircraft and for a moment moves towards the tunnel of light that appears to be modeled on the painting.\nReception.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, \"Fearless\" has an approval rating of 84% based on reviews from 43 critics, with an average score of 7.8/10. The site's consensus states: \"This underrated gem from director Peter Weir features an outstanding performance from Jeff Bridges as a man dealing with profound grief.\" Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a grade of \"B+\" on an A+ to F scale.\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave it three out of four stars, and wrote: \"\"Fearless\" is like a short story that shines a bright light, briefly, into a corner where you usually do not look.\" Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" said: \"Mr. Bridges does well with a difficult role\", and Todd McCarthy of \"Variety\" called it one of Bridges best performances. McCarthy was positive about the film, calling it \"beautifully made in all respects\", but noted that as a mainstream film about profound issues and emotions, some audiences will appreciate it, but others may find it pretentious. Geoff Andrew of \"Time Out\" wrote: \"As often with Weir, there's considerably less here than meets the eye.\"\nHome media.\nWith video and audio quality superseding previous home video releases, \"Fearless\" was released on Blu-ray Disc by the Warner Archive Collection in November 2013.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10979", "revid": "43320205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10979", "title": "Franklin D. Roosevelt", "text": "President of the United States from 1933 to 1945\nFranklin Delano Roosevelt (January 30, 1882\u00a0\u2013 April 12, 1945), also known as FDR, was the 32nd president of the United States, serving from 1933 until his death in 1945. He is the longest-serving U.S. president, as well as the only one to have served more than two terms. His first two terms were centered on combating the Great Depression, while his third and fourth saw him shift his focus to U.S. involvement in World War II. A member of the Democratic Party, Roosevelt previously served in the New York State Senate from 1911 to 1913, the assistant secretary of the Navy under President Woodrow Wilson from 1913 to 1920, and as the 44th governor of New York from 1929 to 1932.\nBorn into the prominent Delano and Roosevelt families in Hyde Park, New York, Roosevelt graduated from Harvard University with a Bachelor of Arts. He entered Columbia Law School in 1904, but dropped out in 1907 after passing the New York bar examination. Roosevelt was elected to the New York State Senate from 1911 to 1913 before serving as the assistant secretary of the Navy under President Wilson during World War I. Roosevelt was James M. Cox's running mate on the Democratic ticket in the 1920 presidential election, which Cox lost to Republican nominee Warren G. Harding. In 1921, Roosevelt contracted a paralytic illness that permanently paralyzed his legs. However, he returned to the public office upon being elected governor of New York in 1928, partly through the encouragement of his wife Eleanor, and during his tenure as governor of New York, he promoted programs to combat the Great Depression. After receiving the Democratic nomination, Roosevelt defeated President Herbert Hoover in a landside victory in the 1932 presidential election.\nDuring his first 100 days as president, Roosevelt spearheaded unprecedented federal legislation and directed the federal government during most of the Great Depression, implementing the New Deal, building the New Deal coalition, and realigning American politics into the Fifth Party System. He created numerous programs to provide relief to the unemployed and farmers while seeking economic recovery with the National Recovery Administration and other programs. He also instituted major regulatory reforms related to finance, communications, and labor, and presided over the end of Prohibition. He was reelected in 1936, upon defeating Alf Landon in one of the largest landslide victories in American history. Roosevelt was unable to expand the Supreme Court in 1937, the same year the conservative coalition was formed to block the implementation of further New Deal programs and reforms. Major surviving programs and legislation implemented under Roosevelt include the Securities and Exchange Commission, the National Labor Relations Act, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Social Security. In 1940, he ran successfully for reelection, before the official implementation of term limits.\nFollowing the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, Roosevelt obtained a declaration of war on Japan. When in turn, Japan's Axis partners, Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, declared war on the U.S. on December 11, 1941, he secured additional declarations of war from the United States Congress. He worked closely with other national leaders in leading the Allies against the Axis powers. Roosevelt supervised the mobilization of the American economy to support the war effort and implemented a Europe first strategy. He also initiated the development of the first atomic bomb and worked with the other Allied leaders to lay the groundwork for the United Nations and other post-war institutions, even coining the term \"United Nations\". Roosevelt won reelection in 1944, but died in 1945 after his physical health seriously and steadily declined during the war years. Since then, several of his actions have come under criticism, such as his ordering of the internment of Japanese Americans. Nonetheless, historical rankings consistently place him among the three greatest American presidents, and he is often considered an icon of American liberalism.\nEarly life and marriage.\nChildhood.\nFranklin Delano Roosevelt was born on January 30, 1882, in Hyde Park, New York, to businessman James Roosevelt I and his second wife, Sara Ann Delano. His parents, who were sixth cousins, came from wealthy, established New York families\u2014the Roosevelts and the Delanos, respectively\u2014and resided at Springwood, a large estate south of Hyde Park's historic center. James was a prominent Bourbon Democrat who once took Franklin to meet President Grover Cleveland. During this meeting, Cleveland said: \"My little man, I am making a strange wish for you. It is that you may never be President of the United States.\" Franklin's mother Sara, the dominant influence in his early years, once declared, \"My son Franklin is a Delano, not a Roosevelt at all.\" James, who was 54 when Franklin was born, was considered by some as a remote father, though biographer James MacGregor Burns indicates James interacted with his son more than was typical at the time. Franklin had a half-brother, James Roosevelt \"Rosy\" Roosevelt, from his father's previous marriage.\nEducation and early career.\nAs a child, Roosevelt learned to ride, shoot, sail, and play polo, tennis, and golf. Frequent trips to Europe\u2014beginning at age two and from age seven to fifteen\u2014helped Roosevelt become conversant in German and French. Except for attending public school in Germany at age nine, Roosevelt was homeschooled by tutors until age 14. He then attended Groton School, an Episcopal boarding school in Groton, Massachusetts. He was not among the more popular Groton students, who were better athletes and had rebellious streaks. Its headmaster, Endicott Peabody, preached the duty of Christians to help the less fortunate and urged his students to enter public service. Peabody remained a strong influence throughout Roosevelt's life, officiating at his wedding and visiting him as president.\nLike most of his Groton classmates, Roosevelt went to Harvard College. He was a member of the Alpha Delta Phi fraternity and the Fly Club, and served as a school cheerleader. Roosevelt was relatively undistinguished as a student or athlete, but he became editor-in-chief of \"The Harvard Crimson\" daily newspaper, which required ambition, energy, and the ability to manage others. He later said, \"I took economics courses in college for four years, and everything I was taught was wrong.\"\nRoosevelt's father died in 1900, distressing him greatly. The following year, Roosevelt's fifth cousin Theodore Roosevelt became U.S. president. Theodore's vigorous leadership style and reforming zeal made him Franklin's role model and hero. He graduated from Harvard in three years in 1903 with an A.B. in history. He remained there for a fourth year, taking graduate courses. Like his cousin Theodore, he was a member of The Explorers Club.\nRoosevelt entered Columbia Law School in 1904, but dropped out in 1907 after passing the New York bar examination. In 1908, he took a job with the prestigious law firm of Carter Ledyard &amp; Milburn, working in the firm's admiralty law division.\nRoosevelt was an avid stamp collector who came into the hobby beginning at eight years old, and continued this pursuit into his adulthood and political career. During his terms as president he aroused nationwide interest in stamp collecting. Beginning in the 1930s, the White House released numerous photographs of him while he was attending his stamp collection. He devoted time each day working with his collection. He worked with Postmaster General James A. Farley over stamp designs, colors, and themes for U.S. postage stamps. When he became stricken with polio it is said the hobby gave him solace and kept his mind off his ailments during his idle hours.\nMarriage, family, and extramarital affairs.\nDuring his second year of college, Roosevelt met and proposed to Boston heiress Alice Sohier, who turned him down. Franklin then began courting his childhood acquaintance and fifth cousin once removed, Eleanor Roosevelt, a niece of Theodore Roosevelt. In 1903, Franklin proposed to Eleanor. Despite resistance from his mother, Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt were married on March 17, 1905. Eleanor's father, Elliott, was deceased; Theodore, who was then president, gave away the bride. The young couple moved into Springwood. Franklin's mother, Sara Roosevelt, also provided a townhouse for the newlyweds in New York City, and had a house built for herself alongside that townhouse. Eleanor never felt at home in the houses at Hyde Park or New York City; however, she loved the family's vacation home on Campobello Island, which was also a gift from Sara.\nBurns indicates that young Franklin Roosevelt was self-assured and at ease in the upper class. On the other hand, Eleanor was shy and disliked social life. Initially, Eleanor stayed home to raise their children. As his father had done, Franklin left childcare to his wife, and Eleanor delegated the task to caregivers. She later said that she knew \"absolutely nothing about handling or feeding a baby\". They had six children. Anna, James, and Elliott were born in 1906, 1907, and 1910, respectively. The couple's second son, Franklin, died in infancy in 1909. Another son, also named Franklin, was born in 1914, and the youngest, John, was born in 1916.\nRoosevelt had several extramarital affairs. He commenced an affair with Eleanor's social secretary, Lucy Mercer, soon after she was hired in 1914. That affair was discovered by Eleanor in 1918. Franklin contemplated divorcing Eleanor, but Sara objected, and Mercer would not marry a divorced man with five children. Franklin and Eleanor remained married, and Franklin promised never to see Mercer again. Eleanor never forgave him for the affair, and their marriage shifted to become a political partnership. Eleanor soon established a separate home in Hyde Park at Val-Kill and devoted herself to social and political causes independent of her husband. The emotional break in their marriage was so severe that when Franklin asked Eleanor in 1942\u2014in light of his failing health\u2014to come live with him again, she refused. Roosevelt was not always aware of Eleanor's visits to the White House. For some time, Eleanor could not easily reach Roosevelt on the telephone without his secretary's help; Franklin, in turn, did not visit Eleanor's New York City apartment until late 1944.\nFranklin broke his promise to Eleanor regarding Lucy Mercer. He and Mercer maintained a formal correspondence and began seeing each other again by 1941. Roosevelt's son Elliott claimed that his father had a 20-year affair with his private secretary, Marguerite LeHand.\nEarly political career (1910\u20131920).\nNew York state senator (1910\u20131913).\nRoosevelt cared little for the practice of law and told friends he planned to enter politics. Despite his admiration for cousin Theodore, Franklin shared his father's bond with the Democratic Party, and in preparation for the 1910 elections, the party recruited Roosevelt to run for a seat in the New York State Assembly. Roosevelt was a compelling recruit: he had the personality and energy for campaigning and the money to pay for his own campaign. But Roosevelt's campaign for the state assembly ended after the Democratic incumbent, Lewis Stuyvesant Chanler, chose to seek re-election. Rather than putting his political hopes on hold, Roosevelt ran for a seat in the New York State Senate. The senate district, located in Dutchess, Columbia, and Putnam Counties, was strongly Republican. Roosevelt feared that opposition from Theodore could end his campaign, but Theodore encouraged his candidacy despite their party differences. Acting as his own campaign manager, Roosevelt traveled throughout the senate district via automobile at a time when few could afford a car. Due to his aggressive campaign, his name gained recognition in the Hudson Valley, and in the Democratic landslide in the 1910 United States elections, Roosevelt won a surprising victory.\nDespite short legislative sessions, Roosevelt treated his new position as a full-time career. Taking his seat on January 1, 1911, Roosevelt soon became the leader of a group of \"Insurgents\" in opposition to the Tammany Hall machine that dominated the state Democratic Party. In the 1911 U.S. Senate election, which was determined in a joint session of the New York state legislature, Roosevelt and nineteen other Democrats caused a prolonged deadlock by opposing a series of Tammany-backed candidates. Tammany threw its backing behind James A. O'Gorman, a highly regarded judge whom Roosevelt found acceptable, and O'Gorman won the election in late March. Roosevelt in the process became a popular figure among New York Democrats. News articles and cartoons depicted \"the second coming of a Roosevelt\", sending \"cold shivers down the spine of Tammany\".\nShortly after being elected to the New York State Senate, Roosevelt became a Freemason, on October 10, 1911, at Holland Lodge No. 8 in New York City.\nRoosevelt also opposed Tammany Hall by supporting New Jersey Governor Woodrow Wilson's successful bid for the 1912 Democratic nomination. The election became a three-way contest when Theodore Roosevelt left the Republican Party to launch a third-party campaign against Wilson and sitting Republican president William Howard Taft. Franklin's decision to back Wilson over his cousin in the general election alienated some of his family, except Theodore. Roosevelt overcame a bout of typhoid fever that year and, with help from journalist Louis McHenry Howe, he was re-elected in the 1912 elections. After the election, he served as chairman of the Agriculture Committee; his success with farm and labor bills was a precursor to his later New Deal policies. He had then become more consistently progressive, in support of labor and social welfare programs.\nAssistant Secretary of the Navy (1913\u20131919).\nRoosevelt's support of Wilson led to his appointment in March 1913 as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, the second-ranking official in the Navy Department after Secretary Josephus Daniels who paid it little attention. Roosevelt had an affection for the Navy, was well-read on the subject, and was an ardent supporter of a large, efficient force. With Wilson's support, Daniels and Roosevelt instituted a merit-based promotion system and extended civilian control over the autonomous departments of the Navy. Roosevelt oversaw the Navy's civilian employees and earned the respect of union leaders for his fairness in resolving disputes. No strikes occurred during his seven-plus years in the office, as he gained valuable experience in labor issues, wartime management, naval issues, and logistics.\nRoosevelt sometimes lent assistance to discriminatory policies of Wilson and Daniels. In 1916, for example, he carried out an order to designate at considerable expense separate toilets for \"the use of [white] women, white men and colored.\" A \"watch force\" took charge of enforcement. The NAACP and civil rights organizations objected so strenuously that the order was rescinded without explanation only a month later.\nIn 1914, Roosevelt ran for the seat of retiring Republican Senator Elihu Root of New York. Though he had the backing of Treasury Secretary William Gibbs McAdoo and Governor Martin H. Glynn, he faced a formidable opponent in Tammany Hall's James W. Gerard. He also was without Wilson's support, as the president needed Tammany's forces for his legislation and 1916 re-election. Roosevelt was soundly defeated in the Democratic primary by Gerard, who in turn lost the general election to Republican James Wolcott Wadsworth Jr. He learned that federal patronage alone, without White House support, could not defeat a strong local organization. After the election, he and Tammany Hall boss Charles Francis Murphy sought accommodation and became allies.\nRoosevelt refocused on the Navy Department as World War I broke out in Europe in August 1914. Though he remained publicly supportive of Wilson, Roosevelt sympathized with the Preparedness Movement, whose leaders strongly favored the Allied Powers and called for a military build-up. The Wilson administration initiated an expansion of the Navy after the sinking of the RMS \"Lusitania\" by a German submarine, and Roosevelt helped establish the United States Navy Reserve and the Council of National Defense. In April 1917, after Germany declared it would engage in unrestricted submarine warfare and attacked several U.S. ships, Congress approved Wilson's call for a declaration of war on Germany.\nRoosevelt requested that he be allowed to serve as a naval officer, but Wilson insisted that he continue as Assistant Secretary. For the next year, Roosevelt remained in Washington to coordinate the naval deployment, as the Navy expanded fourfold. In the summer of 1918, Roosevelt traveled to Europe to inspect naval installations and meet with French and British officials. On account of his relation to Theodore Roosevelt, he was received very prominently considering his relatively junior rank, obtaining long private audiences with King George V and prime ministers David Lloyd George and Georges Clemenceau, as well as a tour of the battlefield at Verdun. In September, on the ship voyage back to the United States, he contracted pandemic influenza with complicating pneumonia, which left him unable to work for a month.\nAfter Germany signed an armistice in November 1918, Daniels and Roosevelt supervised the demobilization of the Navy. Against the advice of older officers such as Admiral William S. Benson\u2014who claimed he could not \"conceive of any use the fleet will ever have for aviation\"\u2014Roosevelt personally ordered the preservation of the Navy's . With the Wilson administration near an end, Roosevelt planned his next run for office. He approached Herbert Hoover about running for the 1920 Democratic presidential nomination, with Roosevelt as his running mate.\nCampaign for vice president (1920).\nRoosevelt's plan for Hoover to run fell through after Hoover publicly declared himself to be a Republican, but Roosevelt decided to seek the 1920 vice presidential nomination. After Governor James M. Cox of Ohio won the party's presidential nomination at the 1920 Democratic National Convention, he chose Roosevelt as his running mate, and the convention nominated him by acclamation. Although his nomination surprised most people, he balanced the ticket as a moderate, a Wilsonian, and a prohibitionist with a famous name. Roosevelt, then 38, resigned as Assistant Secretary after the Democratic convention and campaigned across the nation for the party ticket.\nDuring the campaign, Cox and Roosevelt defended the Wilson administration and the League of Nations, both of which were unpopular in 1920. Roosevelt personally supported U.S. membership in the League, but, unlike Wilson, he favored compromising with Senator Henry Cabot Lodge and other \"Reservationists\". Republicans Warren G. Harding and Calvin Coolidge defeated the Cox\u2013Roosevelt ticket in the presidential election by a wide margin, carrying every state outside of the South. Roosevelt accepted the loss and later reflected that the relationships and goodwill that he built in the 1920 campaign proved to be a major asset in his 1932 campaign. The 1920 election also saw the first public participation of Eleanor Roosevelt who, with the support of Louis Howe, established herself as a valuable political player. After the election, Roosevelt returned to New York City, where he practiced law and served as a vice president of the Fidelity and Deposit Company.\nParalytic illness and political comeback (1921\u20131928).\n Roosevelt sought to build support for a political comeback in the 1922 elections, but his career was derailed by an illness. It began while the Roosevelts were vacationing at Campobello Island in August 1921. Roosevelt was left permanently paralyzed from the waist down and was diagnosed with polio. A 2003 study strongly favored a diagnosis of Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome, but historians have continued to describe his paralysis according to the initial diagnosis.\nThough his mother favored his retirement from public life, Roosevelt, his wife, and Roosevelt's close friend and adviser, Louis Howe, were all determined that he continue his political career. He convinced many people that he was improving, which he believed to be essential prior to running for office. He laboriously taught himself to walk short distances while wearing iron braces on his hips and legs, by swiveling his torso while supporting himself with a cane. He was careful never to be seen using his wheelchair in public, and great care was taken to prevent any portrayal in the press that would highlight his disability. He usually appeared in public standing upright, supported on one side by an aide or one of his sons.\nBeginning in 1925, Roosevelt spent most of his time in the Southern United States, at first on his houseboat, the \"Larooco\". Intrigued by the potential benefits of hydrotherapy, he established a rehabilitation center at Warm Springs, Georgia, in 1926, assembling a staff of physical therapists and using most of his inheritance to purchase the Merriweather Inn. In 1938, he founded the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, leading to the development of polio vaccines.\nRoosevelt remained active in New York politics while also establishing contacts in the South, particularly in Georgia, in the 1920s. He issued an open letter endorsing Al Smith's successful campaign in New York's 1922 gubernatorial election, which both aided Smith and showed Roosevelt's continuing relevance as a political figure. Roosevelt and Smith came from different backgrounds and never fully trusted one another, but Roosevelt supported Smith's progressive policies, while Smith was happy to have Roosevelt's backing.\nRoosevelt gave presidential nominating speeches for Smith at the 1924 and 1928 Democratic National Conventions; the speech at the 1924 convention marked a return to public life following his illness and convalescence. That year, the Democrats were badly divided between an urban wing, led by Smith, and a conservative, rural wing, led by William Gibbs McAdoo. On the 101st ballot, the nomination went to John W. Davis, a compromise candidate who suffered a landslide defeat in the 1924 presidential election. Like many, Roosevelt did not abstain from alcohol during Prohibition, but publicly he sought to find a compromise on the issue acceptable to both wings of the party.\nIn 1925, Smith appointed Roosevelt to the Taconic State Park Commission, and his fellow commissioners chose him as chairman. In this role, he came into conflict with Robert Moses, a Smith prot\u00e9g\u00e9, who was the primary force behind the Long Island State Park Commission and the New York State Council of Parks. Roosevelt accused Moses of using the name recognition of prominent individuals including Roosevelt to win political support for state parks, but then diverting funds to the ones Moses favored on Long Island, while Moses worked to block the appointment of Howe to a salaried position as the Taconic commission's secretary. Roosevelt served on the commission until the end of 1928, and his contentious relationship with Moses continued as their careers progressed.\nIn 1923, Edward Bok established the $100,000 American Peace Award for the best plan to deliver world peace. Roosevelt had leisure time and interest, and he drafted a plan for the contest. He never submitted it because Eleanor was selected as a judge for the prize. His plan called for a new world organization that would replace the League of Nations. Although Roosevelt had been the vice-presidential candidate on the Democratic ticket of 1920 that supported the League, by 1924 he was ready to scrap it. His draft of a \"Society of Nations\" accepted the reservations proposed by Henry Cabot Lodge in the 1919 Senate debate. The new Society would not become involved in the Western Hemisphere, where the Monroe doctrine held sway. It would not have any control over military forces. Although Roosevelt's plan was never made public, he thought about the problem a great deal and incorporated some of his 1924 ideas into the design for the United Nations in 1944\u20131945.\nGovernor of New York (1929\u20131932).\nSmith, the Democratic presidential nominee in the 1928 election, asked Roosevelt to run for governor of New York in the 1928 state election. Roosevelt initially resisted, as he was reluctant to leave Warm Springs and feared a Republican landslide. Party leaders eventually convinced him only he could defeat the Republican gubernatorial nominee, New York Attorney General Albert Ottinger. He won the party's gubernatorial nomination by acclamation and again turned to Howe to lead his campaign. Roosevelt was joined on the campaign trail by associates Samuel Rosenman, Frances Perkins, and James Farley. While Smith lost the presidency in a landslide, and was defeated in his home state, Roosevelt was elected governor by a one-percent margin, and became a contender in the next presidential election.\nRoosevelt proposed the construction of hydroelectric power plants and addressed the ongoing farm crisis of the 1920s. Relations between Roosevelt and Smith suffered after he chose not to retain key Smith appointees like Moses. He and his wife Eleanor established an understanding for the rest of his career; she would dutifully serve as the governor's wife but would also be free to pursue her own agenda and interests. He also began holding \"fireside chats\", in which he directly addressed his constituents via radio, often pressuring the New York State Legislature to advance his agenda.\nIn October 1929, the Wall Street Crash occurred and the Great Depression in the United States began. Roosevelt saw the seriousness of the situation and established a state employment commission. He also became the first governor to publicly endorse the idea of unemployment insurance.\nWhen Roosevelt began his run for a second term in May 1930, he reiterated his doctrine from the campaign two years before: \"that progressive government by its very terms must be a living and growing thing, that the battle for it is never-ending and that if we let up for one single moment or one single year, not merely do we stand still but we fall back in the march of civilization.\" He was re-elected to a second term 56% to 33%.\nRoosevelt proposed an economic relief package and the establishment of the Temporary Emergency Relief Administration to distribute those funds. Led first by Jesse I. Straus and then by Harry Hopkins, the agency assisted over one-third of New York's population between 1932 and 1938. In 1930, Roosevelt passed through the legislature a bill creating old-age insurance for New Yorkers over 70 years of age. He supported reforestation with the Hewitt Amendment in 1931, which gave birth to New York's State Forest system. Roosevelt also began an investigation into corruption in New York City among the judiciary, the police force, and organized crime, prompting the creation of the Seabury Commission. The Seabury investigations exposed an extortion ring, led many public officials to be removed from office, and made the decline of Tammany Hall inevitable.\n1932 presidential election.\nAs the 1932 presidential election approached, Roosevelt turned his attention to national politics, established a campaign team led by Howe and Farley, and a \"brain trust\" of policy advisers, primarily composed of Columbia University and Harvard University professors. Some were not so sanguine about his chances, such as Walter Lippmann, the dean of political commentators, who observed: \"He is a pleasant man who, without any important qualifications for the office, would very much like to be president.\"\nHowever, Roosevelt's efforts as governor to address the effects of the depression in his own state established him as the front-runner for the 1932 Democratic presidential nomination. Roosevelt rallied the progressive supporters of the Wilson administration while also appealing to many conservatives, establishing himself as the leading candidate in the South and West. The chief opposition to Roosevelt's candidacy came from Northeastern conservatives, Speaker of the House John Nance Garner of Texas and Al Smith, the 1928 Democratic presidential nominee.\nRoosevelt entered the convention with a delegate lead due to his success in the 1932 Democratic primaries, but most delegates entered the convention unbound to any particular candidate. On the first presidential ballot, Roosevelt received the votes of more than half but less than two-thirds of the delegates, with Smith finishing in a distant second place. Roosevelt then promised the vice-presidential nomination to Garner, who controlled the votes of Texas and California; Garner threw his support behind Roosevelt after the third ballot, and Roosevelt clinched the nomination on the fourth ballot. Roosevelt flew in from New York to Chicago after learning that he had won the nomination, becoming the first major-party presidential nominee to accept the nomination in person. His appearance was essential, to show himself as vigorous, despite his physical disability.\nIn his acceptance speech, Roosevelt declared, \"I pledge you, I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people... This is more than a political campaign. It is a call to arms.\" Roosevelt promised securities regulation, tariff reduction, farm relief, government-funded public works, and other government actions to address the Great Depression. Reflecting changing public opinion, the Democratic platform included a call for the repeal of Prohibition; Roosevelt himself had not taken a public stand on the issue prior to the convention but promised to uphold the party platform. Otherwise, Roosevelt's primary campaign strategy was one of caution, intent upon avoiding mistakes that would distract from Hoover's failings on the economy. His statements attacked the incumbent and included no other specific policies or programs.\nAfter the convention, Roosevelt won endorsements from several progressive Republicans, including George W. Norris, Hiram Johnson, and Robert La Follette Jr. He also reconciled with the party's conservative wing, and even Al Smith was persuaded to support the Democratic ticket. Hoover's handling of the Bonus Army further damaged the incumbent's popularity, as newspapers across the country criticized the use of force to disperse assembled veterans.\nRoosevelt won 57% of the popular vote and carried all but six states. Historians and political scientists consider the 1932\u201336 elections to be a political realignment. Roosevelt's victory was enabled by the creation of the New Deal coalition, small farmers, the Southern whites, Catholics, big-city political machines, labor unions, northern black Americans (southern ones were still disfranchised), Jews, intellectuals, and political liberals. The creation of the New Deal coalition transformed American politics and started what political scientists call the \"New Deal Party System\" or the Fifth Party System. Between the Civil War and 1929, Democrats had rarely controlled both houses of Congress and had won just four of seventeen presidential elections; from 1932 to 1979, Democrats won eight of twelve presidential elections and generally controlled both houses of Congress.\nTransition and assassination attempt.\nRoosevelt was elected in November 1932 but like his predecessors did not take office until the following March. After the election, President Hoover sought to convince Roosevelt to renounce much of his campaign platform and to endorse the Hoover administration's policies. Roosevelt refused Hoover's request to develop a joint program to stop the economic decline, claiming that it would tie his hands and that Hoover had the power to act.\nDuring the transition, Roosevelt chose Howe as his chief of staff, and Farley as Postmaster General. Frances Perkins, as Secretary of Labor, became the first woman appointed to a cabinet position. William H. Woodin, a Republican industrialist close to Roosevelt, was chosen for Secretary of the Treasury, while Roosevelt chose Senator Cordell Hull of Tennessee as Secretary of State. Harold L. Ickes and Henry A. Wallace, two progressive Republicans, were selected for Secretary of the Interior and Secretary of Agriculture, respectively.\nIn February 1933, Roosevelt escaped an assassination attempt by Giuseppe Zangara, who had expressed a \"hate for all rulers\". As he was attempting to shoot Roosevelt, Zangara was struck by a woman with her purse and then mortally wounded Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak, who was sitting alongside Roosevelt.\nPresidency (1933\u20131945).\nAs president, Roosevelt appointed powerful men to top positions in government. However, he made all of his administration's major decisions himself, regardless of any delays, inefficiencies, or resentments doing so may have caused. Analyzing the president's administrative style, Burns concludes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The president stayed in charge of his administration...by drawing fully on his formal and informal powers as Chief Executive; by raising goals, creating momentum, inspiring a personal loyalty, getting the best out of people...by deliberately fostering among his aides a sense of competition and a clash of wills that led to disarray, heartbreak, and anger but also set off pulses of executive energy and sparks of creativity...by handing out one job to several men and several jobs to one man, thus strengthening his own position as a court of appeals, as a depository of information, and as a tool of co-ordination; by ignoring or bypassing collective decision-making agencies, such as the Cabinet...and always by persuading, flattering, juggling, improvising, reshuffling, harmonizing, conciliating, manipulating.\nFirst and second terms (1933\u20131941).\nWhen Roosevelt was inaugurated on March 4, 1933, the U.S. was at the nadir of the worst depression in its history. A quarter of the workforce was unemployed, and farmers were in deep trouble as prices had fallen by 60%. Industrial production had fallen by more than half since 1929. Two million people were homeless. By the evening of March 4, 32 of the 48 states\u2014as well as the District of Columbia\u2014had closed their banks.\nHistorians categorized Roosevelt's program as \"relief, recovery, and reform\". Relief was urgently needed by the unemployed. Recovery meant boosting the economy back to normal, and reform was required of the financial and banking systems. Through Roosevelt's 30 \"fireside chats\", he presented his proposals directly to the American public as a series of radio addresses. Energized by his own victory over paralytic illness, he used persistent optimism and activism to renew the national spirit.\nFirst New Deal (1933\u20131934).\nOn his second day in office, Roosevelt declared a four-day national \"bank holiday\", to end the run by depositors seeking to withdraw funds. He called for a special session of Congress on March 9, when Congress passed, almost sight unseen, the Emergency Banking Act. The act, first developed by the Hoover administration and Wall Street bankers, gave the president the power to determine the opening and closing of banks and authorized the Federal Reserve Banks to issue banknotes. The \"first 100 Days\" of the 73rd United States Congress saw an unprecedented amount of legislation and set a benchmark against which future presidents have been compared. When the banks reopened on Monday, March 15, stock prices rose by 15 percent and in the following weeks over $1 billion was returned to bank vaults, ending the bank panic. On March 22, Roosevelt signed the Cullen\u2013Harrison Act, which brought Prohibition to a close.\nRoosevelt saw the establishment of a number of agencies and measures designed to provide relief for the unemployed and others. The Federal Emergency Relief Administration, under the leadership of Harry Hopkins, distributed relief to state governments. The Public Works Administration (PWA), under Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes, oversaw the construction of large-scale public works such as dams, bridges, and schools. The Rural Electrification Administration (REA) brought electricity for the first time to millions of rural homes. The most popular of all New Deal agencies\u2014and Roosevelt's favorite\u2014was the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), which hired 250,000 unemployed men for rural projects. Roosevelt also expanded Hoover's Reconstruction Finance Corporation, which financed railroads and industry. Congress gave the Federal Trade Commission broad regulatory powers and provided mortgage relief to millions of farmers and homeowners. Roosevelt also set up the Agricultural Adjustment Administration to increase commodity prices, by paying farmers to leave land uncultivated and cut herds. The policies were criticized when, in a few cases, crops were intentionally plowed under and livestock was killed as a result.\nReform of the economy was the goal of the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) of 1933. It sought to end cutthroat competition by forcing industries to establish rules such as minimum prices, agreements not to compete, and production restrictions. Industry leaders negotiated the rules with NIRA officials, who suspended antitrust laws in return for better wages. The Supreme Court in May 1935 declared NIRA unconstitutional, to Roosevelt's chagrin. He reformed financial regulations with the Glass\u2013Steagall Act, creating the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to underwrite savings deposits. The act also limited affiliations between commercial banks and securities firms. In 1934, the Securities and Exchange Commission was created to regulate the trading of securities, while the Federal Communications Commission was established to regulate telecommunications.\nThe NIRA included $3.3\u00a0billion (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024) of spending through the Public Works Administration to support recovery. Roosevelt worked with Senator Norris to create the largest government-owned industrial enterprise in American history\u2014the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)\u2014which built dams and power stations, controlled floods, and modernized agriculture and home conditions in the poverty-stricken Tennessee Valley. However, locals criticized the TVA for displacing thousands of people for these projects. The Soil Conservation Service trained farmers in the proper methods of cultivation, and with the TVA, Roosevelt became the father of soil conservation. Executive Order 6102 declared that all privately held gold of American citizens was to be sold to the U.S. Treasury and the price raised from $20 to $35 per ounce. The goal was to counter the deflation which was paralyzing the economy.\nRoosevelt tried to keep his campaign promise by cutting the federal budget. This included a reduction in military spending from $752\u00a0million in 1932 to $531\u00a0million in 1934 and a 40% cut in spending on veterans benefits. 500,000 veterans and widows were removed from the pension rolls, and benefits were reduced for the remainder. Federal salaries were cut and spending on research and education was reduced. The veterans were well organized and strongly protested, so most benefits were restored or increased by 1934. Veterans groups such as the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars won their campaign to transform their benefits from payments due in 1945 to immediate cash when Congress overrode the President's veto and passed the Bonus Act in January 1936. It pumped sums equal to 2% of the GDP into the consumer economy and had a major stimulus effect.\nSecond New Deal (1935\u20131936).\nRoosevelt expected that his party would lose seats in the 1934 Congressional elections, as the president's party had done in most previous midterm elections; the Democrats gained seats instead. Empowered by the public's vote of confidence, the first item on Roosevelt's agenda in the 74th Congress was the creation of a social insurance program. The Social Security Act established Social Security and promised economic security for the elderly, the poor, and the sick. Roosevelt insisted that it should be funded by payroll taxes rather than from the general fund, saying, \"We put those payroll contributions there so as to give the contributors a legal, moral, and political right to collect their pensions and unemployment benefits. With those taxes in there, no damn politician can ever scrap my social security program.\" Compared with the social security systems in Western European countries, the Social Security Act of 1935 was rather conservative. Against Roosevelt's original intention for universal coverage, the act excluded farmers, domestic workers, and other groups, which made up about forty percent of the labor force. Nevertheless, for the first time in American history, the federal government took responsibility for the economic security of the aged, the temporarily unemployed, dependent children, and disabled people.\nRoosevelt consolidated the various relief organizations, though some, like the PWA, continued to exist. After winning Congressional authorization for further funding of relief efforts, he established the Works Progress Administration (WPA). Under the leadership of Harry Hopkins, the WPA employed over three million people in its first year of operations. It undertook numerous massive construction projects in cooperation with local governments. It also set up the National Youth Administration and arts organizations.\nThe National Labor Relations Act guaranteed workers the right to collective bargaining through unions of their own choice. The act also established the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to facilitate wage agreements and suppress repeated labor disturbances. The act did not compel employers to reach an agreement with their employees, but it opened possibilities for American labor. The result was a tremendous growth of membership in the labor unions, especially in the mass-production sector. When the Flint sit-down strike threatened the production of General Motors, Roosevelt broke with the precedent set by many former presidents and refused to intervene; the strike ultimately led to the unionization of both General Motors and its rivals in the American automobile industry.\nWhile the First New Deal of 1933 had broad support from most sectors, the Second New Deal challenged the business community. Conservative Democrats, led by Al Smith, fought back with the American Liberty League, savagely attacking Roosevelt and equating him with socialism. But Smith overplayed his hand, and his boisterous rhetoric let Roosevelt isolate his opponents and identify them with the wealthy vested interests that opposed the New Deal, strengthening Roosevelt for the 1936 landslide. By contrast, labor unions, energized by labor legislation, signed up millions of new members and became a major backer of Roosevelt's re-elections in 1936, 1940, and 1944.\nBurns suggests that Roosevelt's policy decisions were guided more by pragmatism than ideology and that he \"was like the general of a guerrilla army whose columns, fighting blindly in the mountains through dense ravines and thickets, suddenly converge, half by plan and half by coincidence, and debouch into the plain below.\" Roosevelt argued that such apparently haphazard methodology was necessary. \"The country needs and, unless I mistake its temper, the country demands bold, persistent experimentation,\" he wrote. \"It is common sense to take a method and try it; if it fails, admit it frankly and try another. But above all, try something.\"\nElection of 1936.\nEight million workers remained unemployed in 1936, and though economic conditions had improved since 1932, they remained sluggish. By 1936, Roosevelt had lost the backing he once held in the business community because of his support for the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) and the Social Security Act. The Republicans had few alternative candidates and nominated Kansas Governor Alf Landon, a little-known bland candidate whose chances were damaged by the public re-emergence of the still-unpopular Herbert Hoover. While Roosevelt campaigned on his New Deal programs and continued to attack Hoover, Landon sought to win voters who approved of the goals of the New Deal but disagreed with its implementation.\nAn attempt by Louisiana Senator Huey Long to organize a left-wing third party collapsed after Long's assassination in 1935. The remnants, helped by Father Charles Coughlin, supported William Lemke of the newly formed Union Party. Roosevelt won re-nomination with little opposition at the 1936 Democratic National Convention, while his allies overcame Southern resistance to abolish the long-established rule that required Democratic presidential candidates to win the votes of two-thirds of the delegates rather than a simple majority.\nIn the election against Landon and a third-party candidate, Roosevelt won 60.8% of the vote and carried every state except Maine and Vermont. The Democratic ticket won the highest proportion of the popular vote. Democrats expanded their majorities in Congress, controlling over three-quarters of the seats in each house. The election also saw the consolidation of the New Deal coalition; while the Democrats lost some of their traditional allies in big business, they were replaced by groups such as organized labor and African Americans, the latter of whom voted Democratic for the first time since the Civil War. Roosevelt lost high-income voters, especially businessmen and professionals, but made major gains among the poor and minorities. He won 86 percent of the Jewish vote, 81 percent of Catholics, 80 percent of union members, 76 percent of Southerners, 76 percent of blacks in northern cities, and 75 percent of people on relief. Roosevelt carried 102 of the country's 106 cities with a population of 100,000 or more.\nSupreme Court fight and second term legislation.\nThe Supreme Court became Roosevelt's primary domestic focus during his second term after the court overturned many of his programs, including NIRA. The more conservative members of the court upheld the principles of the Lochner era, which saw numerous economic regulations struck down on the basis of freedom of contract. Roosevelt proposed the Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937, which would have allowed him to appoint an additional Justice for each incumbent Justice over the age of 70; in 1937, there were six Supreme Court Justices over the age of 70. The size of the Court had been set at nine since the passage of the Judiciary Act of 1869, and Congress had altered the number of Justices six other times throughout U.S. history. Roosevelt's \"court packing\" plan ran into intense political opposition from his own party, led by Vice President Garner since it upset the separation of powers. A bipartisan coalition of liberals and conservatives of both parties opposed the bill, and Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes broke with precedent by publicly advocating the defeat of the bill. Any chance of passing the bill ended with the death of Senate Majority Leader Joseph Taylor Robinson in July 1937.\nStarting with the 1937 case of \"West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish\", the court began to take a more favorable view of economic regulations. Historians have described this as, \"the switch in time that saved nine\". That same year, Roosevelt appointed a Supreme Court Justice for the first time, and by 1941, had appointed seven of the court's nine justices. After \"Parrish\", the Court shifted its focus from judicial review of economic regulations to the protection of civil liberties. Four of Roosevelt's Supreme Court appointees, Felix Frankfurter, Robert H. Jackson,\nHugo Black, and William O. Douglas, were particularly influential in reshaping the jurisprudence of the Court.\nWith Roosevelt's influence on the wane following the failure of the Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937, conservative Democrats joined with Republicans to block the implementation of further New Deal programs. Roosevelt did manage to pass some legislation, including the Housing Act of 1937, a second Agricultural Adjustment Act, and the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938, which was the last major piece of New Deal legislation. The FLSA outlawed child labor, established a federal minimum wage, and required overtime pay for certain employees who work in excess of forty hours per week. He also passed the Reorganization Act of 1939 and subsequently created the Executive Office of the President, making it \"the nerve center of the federal administrative system\". When the economy began to deteriorate again in mid-1937, Roosevelt launched a rhetorical campaign against big business and monopoly power, alleging that the recession was the result of a capital strike and even ordering the Federal Bureau of Investigation to look for a criminal conspiracy (they found none). He then asked Congress for $5\u00a0billion (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024) in relief and public works funding. This created as many as 3.3\u00a0million WPA jobs by 1938. Projects accomplished under the WPA ranged from new federal courthouses and post offices to facilities and infrastructure for national parks, bridges, and other infrastructure across the country, and architectural surveys and archaeological excavations\u2014investments to construct facilities and preserve important resources. Beyond this, however, Roosevelt recommended to a special congressional session only a permanent national farm act, administrative reorganization, and regional planning measures, all of which were leftovers from a regular session. According to Burns, this attempt illustrated Roosevelt's inability to settle on a basic economic program.\nDetermined to overcome the opposition of conservative Democrats in Congress, Roosevelt became involved in the 1938 Democratic primaries, actively campaigning for challengers who were more supportive of New Deal reform. Roosevelt failed badly, managing to defeat only one of the ten targeted. In the November 1938 elections, Democrats lost six Senate seats and 71 House seats, with losses concentrated among pro-New Deal Democrats. When Congress reconvened in 1939, Republicans under Senator Robert Taft formed a Conservative coalition with Southern Democrats, virtually ending Roosevelt's ability to enact his domestic proposals. Despite their opposition to Roosevelt's domestic policies, many of these conservative Congressmen would provide crucial support for his foreign policy before and during World War II.\nConservation and the environment.\nRoosevelt had a lifelong interest in the environment and conservation starting with his youthful interest in forestry on his family estate. Although he was never an outdoorsman or sportsman on Theodore Roosevelt's scale, his growth of the national systems was comparable. When Roosevelt was governor of New York, the Temporary Emergency Relief Administration was essentially a state-level predecessor of the federal Civilian Conservation Corps, with 10,000 or more men building fire trails, combating soil erosion and planting tree seedlings in marginal farmland in New York. As President, Roosevelt was active in expanding, funding, and promoting the National Park and National Forest systems. Their popularity soared, from three million visitors a year at the start of the decade to 15.5\u00a0million in 1939. The Civilian Conservation Corps enrolled 3.4 million young men and built of trails, planted two billion trees, and upgraded of dirt roads. Every state had its own state parks, and Roosevelt made sure that WPA and CCC projects were set up to upgrade them as well as the national systems.\nGNP and unemployment rates.\nGovernment spending increased from 8.0% of the gross national product (GNP) under Hoover in 1932 to 10.2% in 1936. The national debt as a percentage of the GNP had more than doubled under Hoover from 16% to 40% of the GNP in early 1933. It held steady at close to 40% as late as fall 1941, then grew rapidly during the war. The GNP was 34% higher in 1936 than in 1932 and 58% higher in 1940 on the eve of war. That is, the economy grew 58% from 1932 to 1940, and then grew 56% from 1940 to 1945 in five years of wartime. Unemployment fell dramatically during Roosevelt's first term. It increased in 1938 (\"a depression within a depression\") but continually declined after 1938. Total employment during Roosevelt's term expanded by 18.31\u00a0million jobs, with an average annual increase in jobs during his administration of 5.3%.\nForeign policy (1933\u20131941).\nThe main foreign policy initiative of Roosevelt's first term was the Good Neighbor Policy, which was a re-evaluation of U.S. policy toward Latin America. The United States frequently intervened in Latin America following the promulgation of the Monroe Doctrine in 1823, and occupied several Latin American nations during the Banana Wars that occurred following the Spanish\u2013American War of 1898. After Roosevelt took office, he withdrew U.S. forces from Haiti and reached new treaties with Cuba and Panama, ending their status as U.S. protectorates. In December 1933, Roosevelt signed the Montevideo Convention, renouncing the right to intervene unilaterally in the affairs of Latin American countries. Roosevelt also normalized relations with the Soviet Union, which the United States had refused to recognize since the 1920s. He hoped to renegotiate the Russian debt from World War I and open trade relations, but no progress was made on either issue and \"both nations were soon disillusioned by the accord.\"\nThe rejection of the Treaty of Versailles in 1919\u20131920 marked the dominance of non-interventionism in American foreign policy. Despite Roosevelt's Wilsonian background, he and Secretary of State Cordell Hull acted with great care not to provoke isolationist sentiment. The isolationist movement was bolstered in the early to mid-1930s by Senator Gerald Nye and others who succeeded in their effort to stop the \"merchants of death\" in the U.S. from selling arms abroad. This effort took the form of the Neutrality Acts; the president was refused a provision he requested giving him the discretion to allow the sale of arms to victims of aggression. He largely acquiesced to Congress's non-interventionist policies in the early-to-mid 1930s. In the interim, Fascist Italy under Benito Mussolini proceeded to overcome Ethiopia, and the Italians joined Nazi Germany under Adolf Hitler in supporting General Francisco Franco and the Nationalists in the Spanish Civil War. As that conflict drew to a close in early 1939, Roosevelt expressed regret in not aiding the Spanish Republicans. When Japan invaded China in 1937, isolationism limited Roosevelt's ability to aid China, despite atrocities like the Nanking Massacre and the USS \"Panay\" incident.\nGermany annexed Austria in 1938, and soon turned its attention to its eastern neighbors. Roosevelt made it clear that, in the event of German aggression against Czechoslovakia, the U.S. would remain neutral. After completion of the Munich Agreement and the execution of Kristallnacht, American public opinion turned against Germany, and Roosevelt began preparing for a possible war with Germany. Relying on an interventionist political coalition of Southern Democrats and business-oriented Republicans, Roosevelt oversaw the expansion of U.S. airpower and war production capacity.\nWhen World War II began in September 1939 with Germany's invasion of Poland and Britain and France's declaration of war on Germany, Roosevelt sought ways to assist Britain and France militarily. Isolationist leaders like Charles Lindbergh and Senator William Borah successfully mobilized opposition to Roosevelt's proposed repeal of the Neutrality Act, but Roosevelt won Congressional approval of the sale of arms on a cash-and-carry basis. He also began a regular secret correspondence with Britain's First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, in September 1939\u2014the first of 1,700 letters and telegrams between them. Roosevelt forged a close personal relationship with Churchill, who became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in May 1940.\nThe Fall of France in June 1940 shocked the American public, and isolationist sentiment declined. In July 1940, Roosevelt appointed two interventionist Republican leaders, Henry L. Stimson and Frank Knox, as Secretaries of War and the Navy, respectively. Both parties gave support to his plans for a rapid build-up of the American military, but the isolationists warned that Roosevelt would get the nation into an unnecessary war with Germany. In July 1940, a group of Congressmen introduced a bill that would authorize the nation's first peacetime draft, and with the support of the Roosevelt administration, the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940 passed in September. The size of the army increased from 189,000 men at the end of 1939 to 1.4\u00a0million in mid-1941. In September 1940, Roosevelt openly defied the Neutrality Acts by reaching the Destroyers for Bases Agreement, which, in exchange for military base rights in the British Caribbean Islands, gave 50 American destroyers to Britain.\nElection of 1940.\nIn the months prior to the July 1940 Democratic National Convention, there was much speculation as to whether Roosevelt would run for an unprecedented third term. The two-term tradition, although not yet enshrined in the Constitution, had been established by George Washington when he refused to run for a third term in 1796. Roosevelt refused to give a definitive statement, and he even indicated to some ambitious Democrats, such as James Farley, that he would not run for a third term and that they could seek the Democratic nomination. Farley and Vice President John Garner were not pleased with Roosevelt when he ultimately made the decision to break from Washington's precedent. As Germany swept through Western Europe and menaced Britain in mid-1940, Roosevelt decided that only he had the necessary experience and skills to see the nation safely through the Nazi threat. He was aided by the party's political bosses, who feared that no Democrat except Roosevelt could defeat Wendell Willkie, the popular Republican nominee.\nAt the July 1940 Democratic Convention in Chicago, Roosevelt easily swept aside challenges from Farley and Vice President Garner, who had turned against Roosevelt in his second term because of his liberal economic and social policies. To replace Garner on the ticket, Roosevelt turned to Secretary of Agriculture Henry Wallace of Iowa, a former Republican who strongly supported the New Deal and was popular in farm states. The choice was strenuously opposed by many of the party's conservatives, who felt Wallace was too radical and \"eccentric\" in his private life. But Roosevelt insisted that without Wallace on the ticket he would decline re-nomination, and Wallace won the vice-presidential nomination, defeating Speaker of the House William B. Bankhead and other candidates.\nA late August poll taken by Gallup found the race to be essentially tied, but Roosevelt's popularity surged in September following the announcement of the Destroyers for Bases Agreement. Willkie supported much of the New Deal as well as rearmament and aid to Britain but warned that Roosevelt would drag the country into another European war. Responding to Willkie's attacks, Roosevelt promised to keep the country out of the war. Over its last month, the campaign degenerated into a series of outrageous accusations and mud-slinging by the parties. Roosevelt won the 1940 election with 55% of the popular vote, 38 of the 48 states, and almost 85% of the electoral vote.\nThird and fourth terms (1941\u20131945).\nWorld War II dominated Roosevelt's attention, with far more time devoted to world affairs than ever before. Domestic politics and relations with Congress were largely shaped by his efforts to achieve total mobilization of the nation's economic, financial, and institutional resources for the war effort. Even relationships with Latin America and Canada were structured by wartime demands. Roosevelt maintained close personal control of all major diplomatic and military decisions, working closely with his generals and admirals, the war and Navy departments, the British, and even the Soviet Union. His key advisors on diplomacy were Harry Hopkins in the White House, Sumner Welles in the State Department, and Henry Morgenthau Jr. at Treasury. In military affairs, Roosevelt worked most closely with Secretary Henry L. Stimson at the War Department, Army Chief of Staff George Marshall, and Admiral William D. Leahy.\nLead-up to the war.\nBy late 1940, re-armament was in high gear, partly to expand and re-equip the Army and Navy and partly to become the \"Arsenal of Democracy\" for Britain and other countries. With his Four Freedoms speech in January 1941, which proposed four fundamental freedoms that people \"everywhere in the world\" ought to enjoy: freedom of speech and expression, freedom of worship, freedom from want and freedom from fear, Roosevelt laid out the case for an Allied battle for basic rights throughout the world. Assisted by Willkie, Roosevelt won Congressional approval of the Lend-Lease program, which directed massive military and economic aid to Britain and China. In sharp contrast to the loans of World War I, there would be no repayment. As Roosevelt took a firmer stance against Japan, Germany, and Italy, American isolationists such as Charles Lindbergh and the America First Committee vehemently attacked Roosevelt as an irresponsible warmonger. When Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, Roosevelt agreed to extend Lend-Lease to the Soviets. Thus, Roosevelt had committed the U.S. to the Allied side with a policy of \"all aid short of war\". By July 1941, Roosevelt authorized the creation of the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs to counter perceived propaganda efforts in Latin America by Germany and Italy.\nIn August 1941, Roosevelt and Churchill conducted a secret bilateral meeting in which they drafted the Atlantic Charter, conceptually outlining global wartime and postwar goals. This would be the first of several wartime conferences; Churchill and Roosevelt would meet ten more times in person. Though Churchill pressed for an American declaration of war against Germany, Roosevelt believed that Congress would reject any attempt to bring the U.S. into the war. In September, a German submarine fired on the U.S. destroyer \"Greer\", and Roosevelt declared that the U.S. Navy would assume an escort role for Allied convoys in the Atlantic as far east as Britain and would fire upon German ships or U-boats of the Kriegsmarine if they entered the U.S. Navy zone. This \"shoot on sight\" policy brought the U.S. Navy into direct conflict with German submarines and was favored by Americans by a margin of 2-to-1.\nPearl Harbor and declarations of war.\nAfter the German invasion of Poland, the primary concern of both Roosevelt and his top military staff was on the war in Europe, but Japan also presented foreign policy challenges. Relations with Japan had continually deteriorated since its invasion of Manchuria in 1931 and worsened further with Roosevelt's support of China. After Roosevelt announced a $100\u00a0million loan (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024) to China in reaction to Japan's occupation of northern French Indochina, Japan signed the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy; Germany, Japan, and Italy became known as the Axis powers. In July 1941, after Japan occupied the remainder of French Indochina, Roosevelt cut off the sale of oil to Japan, depriving Japan of more than 95 percent of its oil supply. He also placed the Philippine military under American command and reinstated General Douglas MacArthur into active duty to command U.S. forces in the Philippines.\nThe Japanese were incensed by the embargo and Japanese leaders became determined to attack the United States unless it lifted the embargo. The Roosevelt administration was unwilling to reverse the policy, and Secretary of State Hull blocked a potential summit between Roosevelt and Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe. After diplomatic efforts failed, the Privy Council of Japan authorized a strike against the United States. The Japanese believed that the destruction of the United States Asiatic Fleet (stationed in the Philippines) and the United States Pacific Fleet (stationed at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii) was vital to the conquest of Southeast Asia. On December 7, 1941, the Japanese launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, knocking out the main American battleship fleet and killing 2,403 American servicemen and civilians. At the same time, separate Japanese task forces attacked Thailand, British Hong Kong, the Philippines, and other targets. Roosevelt called for war in his \"Infamy Speech\" to Congress, in which he said: \"Yesterday, December 7, 1941\u2014a date which will live in infamy\u2014the United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan.\" In a nearly unanimous vote, Congress declared war on Japan. After Pearl Harbor, antiwar sentiment in the United States largely evaporated overnight. On December 11, 1941, Hitler and Mussolini declared war on the United States, which responded in kind.\nA majority of scholars have rejected the conspiracy theories that Roosevelt, or any other high government officials, knew in advance about the attack on Pearl Harbor. The Japanese had kept their secrets closely guarded, so it is unlikely that American officials were aware of Japanese plans for a surprise attack on the Pacific Fleet. Senior American officials were aware that war was imminent, but they did not expect an attack on Pearl Harbor. Roosevelt assumed that the Japanese would attack either the Dutch East Indies or Thailand.\nWar plans.\nIn late December 1941, Churchill and Roosevelt met at the Arcadia Conference, which established a joint strategy between the U.S. and Britain. Both agreed on a Europe first strategy that prioritized the defeat of Germany before Japan. The U.S. and Britain established the Combined Chiefs of Staff to coordinate military policy and the Combined Munitions Assignments Board to coordinate the allocation of supplies. An agreement was also reached to establish a centralized command in the Pacific theater called ABDA, named for the American, British, Dutch, and Australian forces in the theater. On January 1, 1942, the United States and the other Allied Powers issued the Declaration by United Nations, in which each nation pledged to defeat the Axis powers.\nIn 1942, Roosevelt formed a new body, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which made the final decisions on American military strategy. Admiral Ernest J. King as Chief of Naval Operations commanded the Navy and Marines, while General George C. Marshall led the Army and was in nominal control of the Air Force, which in practice was commanded by General Hap Arnold. The Joint Chiefs were chaired by Admiral William D. Leahy, the most senior officer in the military. Roosevelt avoided micromanaging the war and let his top military officers make most decisions. Roosevelt's civilian appointees handled the draft and procurement of men and equipment, but no civilians\u2014not even the secretaries of War or Navy\u2014had a voice in strategy. Roosevelt avoided the State Department and conducted high-level diplomacy through his aides, especially Harry Hopkins, whose influence was bolstered by his control of the Lend-Lease funds.\nNuclear program.\nIn August 1939, Leo Szilard and Albert Einstein sent the Einstein\u2013Szil\u00e1rd letter to Roosevelt, warning of the possibility of a German project to develop nuclear weapons. Szilard realized that the recently discovered process of nuclear fission could be used to create a weapon of mass destruction. Roosevelt feared the consequences of allowing Germany to have sole possession of the technology and authorized preliminary research into nuclear weapons. After Pearl Harbor, the Roosevelt administration secured funding to continue research and selected General Leslie Groves to oversee the Manhattan Project, which was charged with developing the first nuclear weapons. Roosevelt and Churchill agreed to jointly pursue the project, and Roosevelt helped ensure that American scientists cooperated with their British counterparts.\nWartime conferences.\nRoosevelt coined the term \"Four Policemen\" to refer to the \"Big Four\" Allied powers of World War II: the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and China. The \"Big Three\" of Roosevelt, Winston Churchill, and Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, together with Chinese Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, cooperated informally on a plan in which American and British troops concentrated in the West; Soviet troops fought on the Eastern front; and Chinese, British and American troops fought in Asia and the Pacific. The United States also continued to send aid via the Lend-Lease program to the Soviet Union and other countries. The Allies formulated strategy in a series of high-profile conferences as well as by contact through diplomatic and military channels. Beginning in May 1942, the Soviets urged an Anglo-American invasion of German-occupied France to divert troops from the Eastern front. Concerned that their forces were not yet ready, Churchill and Roosevelt decided to delay such an invasion until at least 1943 and instead focus on a landing in North Africa, known as Operation Torch.\nIn November 1943, Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin met to discuss strategy and post-war plans at the Tehran Conference, where Roosevelt met Stalin for the first time. Britain and the United States committed to opening a second front against Germany in 1944, while Stalin committed to entering the war against Japan at an unspecified date. Subsequent conferences at Bretton Woods and Dumbarton Oaks established the framework for the post-war international monetary system and the United Nations, an intergovernmental organization similar to the failed League of Nations. Taking up the Wilsonian mantle, Roosevelt pushed the establishment of the United Nations as his highest postwar priority. Roosevelt expected it would be controlled by Washington, Moscow, London and Beijing, and would resolve all major world problems.\nRoosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin met for a second time at the February 1945 Yalta Conference in Crimea. With the end of the war in Europe approaching, Roosevelt's primary focus was convincing Stalin to enter the war against Japan; the Joint Chiefs had estimated that an American invasion of Japan would cause as many as one million American casualties. In return, the Soviet Union was promised control of Asian territories such as Sakhalin Island. The three leaders agreed to hold a conference in 1945 to establish the United Nations, and they also agreed on the structure of the United Nations Security Council, which would be charged with ensuring international security. Roosevelt did not push for the immediate evacuation of Soviet soldiers from Poland, but he won the issuance of the Declaration on Liberated Europe, which promised free elections in countries that had been occupied by Germany. Germany itself would not be dismembered but would be jointly occupied by the United States, France, Britain, and the Soviet Union. Against Soviet pressure, Roosevelt and Churchill refused to consent to impose huge reparations and deindustrialization on Germany after the war.\nDuring March 1945, Roosevelt sent strongly worded messages to Stalin accusing him of breaking his Yalta commitments over Poland, Germany, prisoners of war, and other issues. When Stalin accused the Western Allies of plotting behind his back a separate peace with Hitler, Roosevelt replied: \"I cannot avoid a feeling of bitter resentment towards your informers, whoever they are, for such vile misrepresentations of my actions or those of my trusted subordinates.\"\nRoosevelt's role in the Yalta Conference has been controversial; critics charge that he naively trusted the Soviet Union to allow free elections in Eastern Europe, while supporters argue that there was little more that Roosevelt could have done for the Eastern European countries given the Soviet occupation and the need for cooperation with the Soviet Union.\nCourse of the war.\nThe Allies invaded French North Africa in November 1942, securing the surrender of Vichy French forces within days of landing. At the January 1943 Casablanca Conference, the Allies agreed to defeat Axis forces in North Africa and then launch an invasion of Sicily, with an attack on France to take place in 1944. At the conference, Roosevelt also announced that he would only accept the unconditional surrender of Germany, Japan, and Italy. In February 1943, the Soviet Union won a major victory at the Battle of Stalingrad, and in May 1943, the Allies secured the surrender of over 250,000 German and Italian soldiers in North Africa, ending the North African Campaign. The Allies launched an invasion of Sicily in July 1943, capturing the island the following month. In September 1943, the Allies secured an armistice from Italian prime minister Pietro Badoglio, but Germany quickly restored Mussolini to power. The Allied invasion of mainland Italy commenced in September 1943, but the Italian Campaign continued until 1945 as German and Italian troops resisted the Allied advance.\nTo command the invasion of France, Roosevelt chose General Dwight D. Eisenhower, who had successfully commanded a multinational coalition in North Africa and Sicily. Eisenhower launched Operation Overlord on June 6, 1944. Supported by 12,000 aircraft and the largest naval force ever assembled, the Allies successfully established a beachhead in Normandy and then advanced further into France. Though reluctant to back an unelected government, Roosevelt recognized Charles de Gaulle's Provisional Government of the French Republic as the de facto government of France in July 1944. After most of France had been liberated, Roosevelt granted formal recognition to de Gaulle's government in October 1944. Over the following months, the Allies liberated more territory and began the invasion of Germany. By April 1945, Nazi resistance was crumbling in the face of advances by both the Western Allies and the Soviet Union.\nIn the opening weeks of the war, Japan conquered the Philippines and the British and Dutch colonies in Southeast Asia. The Japanese advance reached its maximum extent by June 1942, when the U.S. Navy scored a decisive victory at the Battle of Midway. American and Australian forces then began a slow and costly strategy called island hopping or leapfrogging through the Pacific Islands, with the objective of gaining bases from which strategic airpower could be brought to bear on Japan and from which Japan could ultimately be invaded. In contrast to Hitler, Roosevelt took no direct part in the tactical naval operations, though he approved strategic decisions. Roosevelt gave way in part to insistent demands from the public and Congress that more effort be devoted against Japan, but he always insisted on Germany first. The strength of the Japanese navy was decimated in the Battle of Leyte Gulf, and by April 1945 the Allies had re-captured much of their lost territory in the Pacific.\nHome front.\nThe home front was subject to dynamic social changes throughout the war, though domestic issues were no longer Roosevelt's most urgent policy concern. The military buildup spurred economic growth. Unemployment fell from 7.7\u00a0million in spring 1940 to 3.4\u00a0million in fall 1941 and to 1.5\u00a0million in fall 1942, out of a labor force of 54\u00a0million. There was a growing labor shortage, accelerating the second wave of the Great Migration of African Americans, farmers and rural populations to manufacturing centers. African Americans from the South went to California and other West Coast states for new jobs in the defense industry. To pay for increased government spending, the Revenue Act of 1942 instituted top tax rates as high as 94% (after accounting for the excess profits tax), greatly increased the tax base, and instituted the first federal withholding tax. In 1944, Roosevelt requested that Congress enact legislation to tax all \"unreasonable\" profits, both corporate and individual, and thereby support his declared need for over $10\u00a0billion in revenue for the war and other government measures. Congress overrode Roosevelt's veto to pass a smaller revenue bill raising $2\u00a0billion.\nIn 1942, war production increased dramatically but fell short of Roosevelt's goals, due in part to manpower shortages. The effort was also hindered by numerous strikes, especially in the coal mining and railroad industries, which lasted well into 1944. Nonetheless, between 1941 and 1945, the United States produced 2.4\u00a0million trucks, 300,000 military aircraft, 88,400 tanks, and 40\u00a0billion rounds of ammunition. The production capacity of the United States dwarfed that of other countries; for example, in 1944, the United States produced more military aircraft than the combined production of Germany, Japan, Britain, and the Soviet Union. The White House became the ultimate site for labor mediation, conciliation or arbitration. One particular battle royale occurred between Vice President Wallace, who headed the Board of Economic Warfare, and Jesse H. Jones, in charge of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation; both agencies assumed responsibility for the acquisition of rubber supplies and came to loggerheads over funding. Roosevelt resolved the dispute by dissolving both agencies. In 1943, Roosevelt established the Office of War Mobilization to oversee the home front; the agency was led by James F. Byrnes, who came to be known as the \"assistant president\" due to his influence.\nRoosevelt's 1944 State of the Union Address advocated that Americans should think of basic economic rights as a Second Bill of Rights. He stated that all Americans should have the right to \"adequate medical care\", \"a good education\", \"a decent home\", and a \"useful and remunerative job\". In the most ambitious domestic proposal of his third term, Roosevelt proposed the G.I. Bill, which would create a massive benefits program for returning soldiers. Benefits included post-secondary education, medical care, unemployment insurance, job counseling, and low-cost loans for homes and businesses. The G.I. Bill passed unanimously in both houses of Congress and was signed into law in June 1944. Of the fifteen million Americans who served in World War II, more than half benefitted from the educational opportunities provided for in the G.I. Bill.\nTowards the end of his presidency, Roosevelt supported the idea of forming a new liberal party with former liberal Republican presidential candidate Wendell Willkie (who himself put forward this proposal), believing that there should be two ideologically distinct parties in America; one liberal and one conservative.\nDeclining health.\nRoosevelt, a chain-smoker throughout his adult life, had been in declining health since at least 1940. In March 1944, shortly after his 62nd birthday, he underwent testing at Bethesda Hospital and was found to have hypertension, atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease causing angina pectoris, and congestive heart failure.\nHospital physicians and two outside specialists ordered Roosevelt to rest. His personal physician, Admiral Ross McIntire, created a daily schedule that banned business guests for lunch and incorporated two hours of rest daily. During the 1944 re-election campaign, McIntire denied several times that Roosevelt's health was poor; on October 12, for example, he announced that \"The President's health is perfectly OK. There are absolutely no organic difficulties at all.\" Roosevelt realized that his declining health could eventually make it impossible for him to continue as president, and in 1945 he told a confidant that he might resign from the presidency following the end of the war.\nElection of 1944.\nWhile some Democrats had opposed Roosevelt's nomination in 1940, the president faced little difficulty in securing his re-nomination at the 1944 Democratic National Convention. Roosevelt made it clear before the convention that he was seeking another term, and on the lone presidential ballot of the convention, Roosevelt won the vast majority of delegates, although a minority of Southern Democrats voted for Harry F. Byrd. Party leaders prevailed upon Roosevelt to drop Vice President Wallace from the ticket, believing him to be an electoral liability and a poor potential successor in case of Roosevelt's death. Roosevelt preferred Byrnes as Wallace's replacement but was convinced to support Senator Harry S. Truman of Missouri, who had earned renown for his investigation of war production inefficiency and was acceptable to the various factions of the party. On the second vice presidential ballot of the convention, Truman defeated Wallace to win the nomination.\nThe Republicans nominated Thomas E. Dewey, the governor of New York, who had a reputation as a liberal in his party. They accused the Roosevelt administration of domestic corruption and bureaucratic inefficiency, but Dewey's most effective gambit was to raise discreetly the age issue. He assailed the President as a \"tired old man\" with \"tired old men\" in his cabinet, pointedly suggesting that the President's lack of vigor had produced a less than vigorous economic recovery. Roosevelt, as most observers could see from his weight loss and haggard appearance, was a tired man in 1944. But upon entering the campaign in earnest in late September 1944, Roosevelt displayed enough passion to allay most concerns and deflect Republican attacks. With the war still raging, he urged voters not to \"change horses in mid-stream\". Labor unions, which had grown rapidly in the war, fully supported Roosevelt. Roosevelt and Truman won the 1944 election, defeating Dewey and his running mate John W. Bricker with 53.4% of the popular vote and 432 out of the 531 electoral votes. The president campaigned in favor of a strong United Nations, so his victory symbolized support for the nation's future participation in the international community.\nFinal months and death.\nWhen Roosevelt returned to the United States from the Yalta Conference, everyone was shocked to see how old, thin and frail he looked. In his address to Congress he spoke while seated, an unprecedented concession to his physical incapacity. On March 29, 1945, Roosevelt departed for the Little White House in Warm Springs, Georgia, to rest before his anticipated appearance at the founding conference of the United Nations.\nIn the afternoon of April 12, 1945, in Warm Springs, Georgia, while sitting for a portrait by Elizabeth Shoumatoff, Roosevelt said: \"I have a terrific headache.\" He then slumped forward in his chair, unconscious, and was carried into his bedroom. The president's attending cardiologist, Howard Bruenn, diagnosed a massive intracerebral hemorrhage. At 3:35\u00a0p.m., Roosevelt died at the age of 63.\nOn April 13, Roosevelt's body was placed in a flag-draped coffin and loaded onto the \"Ferdinand Magellan\" presidential train for the trip back to Washington. Due to the U.S. still being in a state of war, a state funeral was deemed inappropriate and a smaller ceremony was opted for instead. Despite this, thousands flocked to the route to pay their respects.\nRather than lying in state at the United States Capitol as per tradition, Roosevelt's remains were placed in the White House East Room where, on April 14, a simple funeral service was held that was attended by his family, high government officials, and foreign ambassadors. Roosevelt was then transported by train from Washington to his birthplace at Hyde Park. On April 15, he was buried, per his wish, in the rose garden of his Springwood estate.\nHis death was met with shock and grief across the world. Germany surrendered during the 30-day mourning period, but Harry Truman (who had succeeded Roosevelt as president) ordered flags to remain at half-staff; he also dedicated Victory in Europe Day and its celebrations to Roosevelt's memory. World War II ended with the signed surrender of Japan in September.\nRoosevelt's declining physical health had been kept secret from the public, just as his wheelchair was kept a secret from the public. Although he was allowed to work only four hours a day, the illusion of activity was kept up. In the scholarly book, \"The Dying President: Franklin D. Roosevelt, 1944\u20131945\" by Robert Ferrell, the extent to which the president and his top aides went to keep the public in the dark about decline is explored, as well as the political and diplomatic problems that arose both from the illness and the secrecy. It argues that Roosevelt was too sick to have remained in office, and that his inability to work led to critical foreign-policy mistakes in 1944\u20131945, as well as a failure to prepare Vice President Harry S. Truman to take over. What little energy he had for presidential affairs he focused on building support for the new United Nations.\nCivil rights, repatriation, internment, and the Holocaust.\nFrom his first term until 1939, the Mexican Repatriation started by President Herbert Hoover continued under Roosevelt, which scholars today contend was a form of ethnic cleansing towards Mexican Americans. Roosevelt ended federal involvement in the deportations. After 1934, deportations fell by approximately 50 percent. However, Roosevelt did not attempt to suppress the deportations on a local or state level. Mexican Americans were the only group explicitly excluded from New Deal benefits. The deprival of due process for Mexican Americans is cited as a precedent for Roosevelt's internment of Japanese Americans in concentration camps during World War II. Roosevelt won strong support from Chinese Americans and Filipino Americans, but not Japanese Americans, as he presided over their internment during the war. African Americans and Native Americans fared well in two New Deal relief programs, the Civilian Conservation Corps and the Indian Reorganization Act, respectively. Sitkoff reports that the WPA \"provided an economic floor for the whole black community in the 1930s, rivaling both agriculture and domestic service as the chief source\" of income.\nLynching and civil rights.\nIn contrast to Presidents Harding and Coolidge, Roosevelt stopped short of joining NAACP leaders in pushing for federal anti-lynching legislation. He asserted that such legislation was unlikely to pass and that his support for it would alienate Southern congressmen, though by 1940 even his conservative Texan vice-president, Garner, supported federal action against lynching.\nRoosevelt did not appoint or nominate a single African American as secretary or assistant secretary to his cabinet. About one hundred African Americans met informally, however, to provide the administration with advice on issues related to African Americans. Although sometimes described as a \"Black Cabinet\", Roosevelt never officially acknowledged it as such nor did he make \"appointments\" to it.\nAlthough African American sprinter Jesse Owens had won 4 gold medals for the United States in the 1936 Olympic Games, Roosevelt never congratulated Owens or invited him to the White House to celebrate his triumphs. When the Democrats bid for his support, Owens rejected those overtures and endorsed Alf Landon, Roosevelt's Republican opponent in the 1936 presidential race.\nFirst Lady Eleanor Roosevelt vocally supported efforts designed to aid the African American community, including the Fair Labor Standards Act, which helped boost wages for nonwhite workers in the South. In 1941, Roosevelt established the Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC) to implement Executive Order 8802, which prohibited racial and religious discrimination in employment among defense contractors. The FEPC was the first national program directed against employment discrimination, and it played a major role in opening up new employment opportunities to nonwhite workers. During World War II, the proportion of African American men employed in manufacturing positions rose significantly. In response to Roosevelt's policies, African Americans increasingly defected from the Republican Party during the 1930s and 1940s, becoming an important Democratic voting bloc in several Northern states.\nJapanese Americans.\nThe attack on Pearl Harbor raised concerns among the public regarding the possibility of sabotage by Japanese Americans. This suspicion was fed by long-standing racism against Japanese immigrants and the findings of the Roberts Commission, which concluded that the attack on Pearl Harbor had been assisted by Japanese spies. On February 19, 1942, Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066, which relocated 110,000 Japanese-American citizens and immigrants, most of whom lived on the Pacific Coast. They were forced to liquidate their properties and businesses and interned in hastily built camps in interior, harsh locations.\nRoosevelt delegated the decision for internment to Secretary of War Stimson, who in turn relied on the judgment of Assistant Secretary of War John J. McCloy. The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the executive order in the 1944 case of \"Korematsu v. United States\". A much smaller number of German and Italian citizens were arrested or placed into internment camps. Unlike Japanese Americans, however, they were not sent to them on the sole basis of racial ancestry.\nThe Holocaust.\nThere is controversy among historians about Roosevelt's attitude to Jews and the Holocaust. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. says Roosevelt \"did what he could do\" to help Jews; David Wyman says Roosevelt's record on Jewish refugees and their rescue is \"very poor\" and one of the worst failures of his presidency. In 1923, as a member of the Harvard University board of directors, Roosevelt decided there were too many Jewish students at Harvard and helped institute a quota to limit the number of Jews admitted. After Kristallnacht in 1938, Roosevelt had his ambassador to Germany recalled to Washington. He did not loosen immigration quotas but did allow German Jews already in the U.S. on visas to stay indefinitely. According to Rafael Medoff, Roosevelt could have saved 190,000 Jewish lives by telling his State Department to fill immigration quotas to the legal limit, but his administration discouraged and disqualified Jewish refugees based on its prohibitive requirements that left less than 25% of the quotas filled.\nAdolf Hitler chose to implement the \"Final Solution\"\u2014the extermination of the European Jewish population\u2014by January 1942, and American officials learned of the scale of the Nazi extermination campaign in the following months. Against the objections of the State Department, Roosevelt convinced the other Allied leaders to issue the Joint Declaration by Members of the United Nations, which condemned the ongoing Holocaust and warned to try its perpetrators as war criminals. In 1943, Roosevelt told U.S. government officials that there should be limits on Jews in various professions to \"eliminate the specific and understandable complaints which the Germans bore towards the Jews in Germany.\" The same year, Roosevelt was personally briefed by Polish Home Army intelligence agent Jan Karski who was an eyewitness of the Holocaust; pleading for action, Karski told him that 1.8 million Jews had already been exterminated. Karski recalled that Roosevelt \"did not ask one question about the Jews\". In January 1944, Roosevelt established the War Refugee Board to aid Jews and other victims of Axis atrocities. Aside from these actions, Roosevelt believed that the best way to help the persecuted populations of Europe was to end the war as quickly as possible. Top military leaders and War Department leaders rejected any campaign to bomb the extermination camps or the rail lines leading to them, fearing it would be a diversion from the war effort. According to biographer Jean Edward Smith, there is no evidence that anyone ever proposed such a campaign to Roosevelt.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nRoosevelt is widely considered to be one of the most important figures in U.S. history, and one of the most influential figures of the 20th century. Historians and political scientists consistently rank him, George Washington, and Abraham Lincoln as the three greatest presidents, although the order varies. Reflecting on Roosevelt's presidency, \"which brought the United States through the Great Depression and World War II to a prosperous future\", biographer Jean Edward Smith said in 2007, \"He lifted himself from a wheelchair to lift the nation from its knees.\"\nHis commitment to the working class and unemployed in need of relief in the nation's longest recession made him a favorite of blue-collar workers, labor unions, and ethnic minorities. The rapid expansion of government programs that occurred during Roosevelt's term redefined the role of government in the United States, and Roosevelt's advocacy for government social programs was instrumental in redefining liberalism for coming generations. Roosevelt firmly established U.S. leadership on the world stage with his role in shaping and financing World War II. His isolationist critics faded away, and even the Republicans joined in his overall policies. He also permanently increased the power of the president at the expense of Congress.\nHis Second Bill of Rights became, according to historian Joshua Zeitz, \"the basis of the Democratic Party's aspirations for the better part of four decades\". After his death, Eleanor continued to be a forceful presence in U.S. and world politics, serving as delegate to the conference which established the United Nations and championing civil rights and liberalism generally. Some junior New Dealers played leading roles in the presidencies of Truman, John F. Kennedy, and Lyndon B. Johnson. Kennedy came from a Roosevelt-hating family. Historian William Leuchtenburg says that before 1960, \"Kennedy showed a conspicuous lack of inclination to identify himself as a New Deal liberal.\" He adds, as president, \"Kennedy never wholly embraced the Roosevelt tradition and at times he deliberately severed himself from it.\" By contrast, young Lyndon Johnson had been an enthusiastic New Dealer and a favorite of Roosevelt. Johnson modelled his presidency on Roosevelt's.\nDuring his presidency, and continuing to a lesser extent afterwards, there has been much criticism of Roosevelt, some of it intense. Critics have questioned not only his policies, positions, and the consolidation of power that occurred due to his responses to the Depression and World War II but also his breaking with tradition by running for a third term as president. Long after his death, new lines of attack criticized Roosevelt's policies regarding helping the Jews of Europe, incarcerating the Japanese on the West Coast, and opposing anti-lynching legislation.\nRoosevelt was criticized by conservatives for his economic policies, especially the shift in tone from individualism to collectivism with the expansion of the welfare state and regulation of the economy. Those criticisms continued decades after his death. One factor in the revisiting of these issues was the election of Ronald Reagan in 1980, who opposed the New Deal. Roosevelt's issuance of Executive Order 6102, which mandated the largest gold confiscation in American history, remains controversial to gold investors.\nMemorials.\nRoosevelt's home in Hyde Park is now a National Historic Site and home to his Presidential library. Washington, D.C., hosts two memorials: the Roosevelt Memorial, located next to the Jefferson Memorial on the Tidal Basin, and a more modest memorial, a block of marble in front of the National Archives building suggested by Roosevelt himself, erected in 1965. Roosevelt's leadership in the March of Dimes is one reason he is commemorated on the American dime. Roosevelt has also appeared on several U.S. Postage stamps. On April 29, 1945, seventeen days after Roosevelt's death, the carrier was launched and served from 1945 to 1977. London's Westminster Abbey also has a stone tablet memorial to Roosevelt that was unveiled by Attlee and Churchill in 1948. Welfare Island was renamed after Roosevelt in September 1973.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrint sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "10980", "revid": "44452519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10980", "title": "Four Freedoms", "text": "1941 State of the Union goals\nThe Four Freedoms were goals articulated by U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt on Monday, January 6, 1941. In an address known as the (technically the 1941 State of the Union address), he proposed four fundamental freedoms that people \"everywhere in the world\" ought to enjoy:\nRoosevelt delivered his speech 11 months before the surprise Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, which caused the United States to declare war on Japan on December 8, 1941. The State of the Union speech before Congress was largely about the national security of the United States and the threat to other democracies from world war. In the speech, he made a break with the long-held tradition of United States non-interventionism. He outlined the U.S. role in helping allies already engaged in warfare, especially Great Britain and China.\nIn that context, he summarized the values of democracy behind the bipartisan consensus on international involvement that existed at the time. A famous quote from the speech prefaces those values: \"As men do not live by bread alone, they do not fight by armaments alone.\" In the second half of the speech, he lists the benefits of democracy, which include economic opportunity, employment, social security, and the promise of \"adequate health care\". The first two freedoms, of speech and religion, are protected by the First Amendment in the United States Constitution. His inclusion of the latter two freedoms went beyond the traditional Constitutional values protected by the U.S. Bill of Rights. Roosevelt endorsed a broader human right to economic security and anticipated what would become known decades later as the \"human security\" paradigm in studies of economic development. He also included the \"freedom from fear\" against international aggression, calling for a \"world-wide reduction of armaments.\"\nHistorical context.\nIn the 1930s many Americans, arguing that the involvement in World War I had been a mistake, were adamantly against continued intervention in European affairs. With the Neutrality Acts established after 1935, U.S. law banned the sale of armaments to countries that were at war and placed restrictions on travel with belligerent vessels.\nWhen World War II began in September 1939, the neutrality laws were still in effect and ensured that no substantial support could be given to Britain and France. With the revision of the Neutrality Act in 1939, Roosevelt adopted a \"methods-short-of-war policy\" whereby supplies and armaments could be given to European Allies, provided no declaration of war could be made and no troops committed. By December 1940, Europe was largely at the mercy of Adolf Hitler and Germany's Nazi regime. With Germany's defeat of France in June 1940, Britain and its overseas Empire stood alone against the military alliance of Germany, Italy, and Japan. Winston Churchill, as Prime Minister of Britain, called for Roosevelt and the United States to supply them with armaments in order to continue with the war effort.\nThe 1939 New York World's Fair had celebrated Four Freedoms \u2013 religion, speech, press, and assembly \u2013 and commissioned Leo Friedlander to create sculptures representing them. Mayor of New York City Fiorello La Guardia described the resulting statues as the \"heart of the fair\". Later Roosevelt would declare his own \"Four Essential Freedoms\" and call on Walter Russell to create a \"Four Freedoms Monument\" that was eventually dedicated at Madison Square Garden in New York City.\nThey also appeared on the reverse of the AM-lira, the Allied Military Currency note issue that was issued in Italy during WWII, by the Americans, that was in effect occupation currency, guaranteed by the U.S. dollar.\nDeclarations.\nThe Four Freedoms Speech was given on January 6, 1941. Roosevelt's hope was to provide a rationale for why the United States should abandon the isolationist policies that emerged from World War I. In the address, Roosevelt critiqued Isolationism, saying: \"No realistic American can expect from a dictator's peace international generosity, or return of true independence, or world disarmament, or freedom of expression, or freedom of religion\u2013or even good business. Such a peace would bring no security for us or for our neighbors. 'Those, who would give up essential liberty to purchase a little temporary safety, deserve neither liberty nor safety.'\"\nThe speech coincided with the introduction of the Lend-Lease Act, which promoted Roosevelt's plan to become the \"arsenal of democracy\" and support the Allies (mainly the British) with much-needed supplies. Furthermore, the speech established what would become the ideological basis for America's involvement in World War II, all framed in terms of individual rights and liberties that are the hallmark of American politics.\nThe speech delivered by President Roosevelt incorporated the following text, known as the \"Four Freedoms\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the future days, which we seek to make secure, we look forward to a world founded upon four essential human freedoms.\nThe first is freedom of speech, and expression\u2014everywhere in the world.\nThe second is freedom of every person to worship God in his own way\u2014everywhere in the world.\nThe third is freedom from want\u2014which, translated into world terms, means economic understandings which will secure to every nation a healthy peacetime life for its inhabitants\u2014everywhere in the world.\nThe fourth is freedom from fear\u2014which, translated into world terms, means a world-wide reduction of armaments to such a point and in such a thorough fashion that no nation will be in a position to commit an act of physical aggression against any neighbor\u2014anywhere in the world.\nThat is no vision of a distant millennium.\nIt is a definite basis for a kind of world attainable in our own time and generation.\nThat kind of world is the very antithesis of the so-called new order of tyranny which the dictators seek to create with the crash of a bomb.\u2014\u200a\nLater in the same speech the president went on to specify six basic goals:\nJustification for war.\nThe declaration of the Four Freedoms as a justification for war would resonate through the remainder of the war, and for decades longer as a frame of remembrance. The Freedoms became the staple of America's war aims and the center of all attempts to rally public support for the war. With the creation of the Office of War Information (1942), as well as the famous paintings by Norman Rockwell, the Freedoms were advertised as values central to American life and examples of American exceptionalism.\nOpposition.\nThe Four Freedoms Speech was popular, and the goals were influential in postwar politics. However, in 1941 the speech received heavy criticism from anti-war elements. Critics argued that the Four Freedoms were simply a charter for Roosevelt's New Deal, social reforms that had already created sharp divisions within Congress. Conservatives who opposed social programs and increased government intervention argued against Roosevelt's attempt to justify and depict the war as necessary for the defense of lofty goals.\nWhile the Freedoms did become a forceful aspect of American thought on the war, they were never the exclusive justification for the war. Polls and surveys conducted by the United States Office of War Information (OWI) revealed that self-defense and vengeance for the attack on Pearl Harbor were still the most prevalent reasons for war.\nUnited Nations.\nThe concept of the Four Freedoms became part of the personal mission undertaken by former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt in 1948. She helped inspire the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, General Assembly Resolution 217A. Indeed, these Four Freedoms were explicitly incorporated into the preamble to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which reads: \"\"Whereas\" disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy the freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed the highest aspiration of the common people.\"\nDisarmament.\nFDR called for \"a world-wide reduction of armaments\" as a goal for \"the future days, which we seek to make secure\" but one that was \"attainable in our own time and generation.\" More immediately, though, he called for a massive build-up of U.S. arms production:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Every realist knows that the democratic way of life is at this moment being directly assailed in every part of the world\u00a0... The need of the moment is that our actions and our policy should be devoted primarily\u2014almost exclusively\u2014to meeting this foreign peril.\u00a0... [T]he immediate need is a swift and driving increase in our armament production.\u00a0... I also ask this Congress for authority and for funds sufficient to manufacture additional munitions and war supplies of many kinds, to be turned over to those nations which are now in actual war with aggressor nations.\u2014\u200a\nViolation.\nIn a 1942 radio address, President Roosevelt declared the Four Freedoms embodied \"rights of men of every creed and every race, wherever they live.\" On February 19, 1942, he authorized Japanese American internment with Executive Order 9066. It allowed local military commanders to designate \"military areas\" as \"exclusion zones\", from which \"any or all persons may be excluded\". This power was used to declare that all people of Japanese ancestry were excluded from the entire Pacific coast, including all of California and much of Oregon, Washington, and Arizona, except for those in internment camps. By 1946, the United States had incarcerated 120,000 individuals of Japanese descent, of whom about 80,000 had been born in the United States.\nAfrican Americans also often experienced contradictions between the rhetoric of the Four Freedoms and harsh realities. \"The politically exiled J.B. Martin,\" writes historian David T. Beito, then living in Chicago, must have had mixed feelings if he listened to the president\u2019s speech. The Crump machine [then closely allied with FDR], after \u201cpolicing\u201d his drug store, had driven him [the black Republican leader] out of Memphis.\"\nFranklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park.\nThe Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park is a park designed by the architect Louis Kahn for the south point of Roosevelt Island in New York City. The park celebrates the famous speech, and text from the speech is inscribed on a granite wall in the final design of the park.\nAwards.\nThe Roosevelt Institute honors outstanding individuals who have demonstrated a lifelong commitment to these ideals. The Four Freedoms Award medals are awarded at ceremonies at Hyde Park, New York and Middelburg, Netherlands during alternate years. The awards were first presented in 1982 on the centenary of President Roosevelt's birth as well as the bicentenary of diplomatic relations between the United States and the Netherlands.\nAmong the laureates have been:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNorman Rockwell's paintings.\nRoosevelt's speech inspired a set of four paintings by Norman Rockwell.\nPaintings.\nThe members of the set, known collectively as \"The Four Freedoms\", were published in four consecutive issues of \"The Saturday Evening Post\". The four paintings subsequently were displayed around the US by the United States Department of the Treasury.\nEssays.\nEach painting was published with a matching essay on that particular \"Freedom\":\nPostage stamps.\nRockwell's \"Four Freedoms\" paintings were reproduced as postage stamps by the United States Post Office in 1943, in 1946, and in 1994, the centenary of Rockwell's birth.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10983", "revid": "50687524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10983", "title": "First-order logic", "text": "Type of logical system\nFirst-order logic, also called predicate logic, predicate calculus, or quantificational logic, is a type of formal system used in mathematics, philosophy, linguistics, and computer science. First-order logic uses quantified variables over non-logical objects, and allows the use of sentences that contain variables. Rather than propositions such as \"all humans are mortal\", in first-order logic one can have expressions in the form \"for all \"x\", if \"x\" is a human, then \"x\" is mortal\", where \"for all \"x\"\" is a quantifier, \"x\" is a variable, and \"... \"is a human\"\" and \"... \"is mortal\"\" are predicates. This distinguishes it from propositional logic, which does not use quantifiers or relations; in this sense, first-order logic is an extension of propositional logic.\nA theory about a topic, such as set theory, a theory for groups, or a formal theory of arithmetic, is usually a first-order logic together with a specified domain of discourse (over which the quantified variables range), finitely many functions from that domain to itself, finitely many predicates defined on that domain, and a set of axioms believed to hold about them. \"Theory\" is sometimes understood in a more formal sense as just a set of sentences in first-order logic.\nThe term \"first-order\" distinguishes first-order logic from higher-order logic, in which there are predicates having predicates or functions as arguments, or in which quantification over predicates, functions, or both, are permitted. In first-order theories, predicates are often associated with sets. In interpreted higher-order theories, predicates may be interpreted as sets of sets.\nThere are many deductive systems for first-order logic which are both sound, i.e. all provable statements are true in all models; and complete, i.e. all statements which are true in all models are provable. Although the logical consequence relation is only semidecidable, much progress has been made in automated theorem proving in first-order logic. First-order logic also satisfies several metalogical theorems that make it amenable to analysis in proof theory, such as the L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem and the compactness theorem.\nFirst-order logic is the standard for the formalization of mathematics into axioms, and is studied in the foundations of mathematics. Peano arithmetic and Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory are axiomatizations of number theory and set theory, respectively, into first-order logic. No first-order theory, however, has the strength to uniquely describe a structure with an infinite domain, such as the natural numbers or the real line. Axiom systems that do fully describe these two structures, i.e. categorical axiom systems, can be obtained in stronger logics such as second-order logic.\nThe foundations of first-order logic were developed independently by Gottlob Frege and Charles Sanders Peirce. For a history of first-order logic and how it came to dominate formal logic, see Jos\u00e9 Ferreir\u00f3s (2001).\nIntroduction.\n B, A \\downarrow B, \\overline{A+B}&lt;/math&gt;\n | XNOR | formula_1\n | \u2514 equivalent | formula_2\n | XOR | formula_3\n | \u2514 nonequivalent | formula_4\n | implies | formula_5\n | nonimplication\u00a0(NIMPLY) | formula_6\n | converse | formula_7\n | converse nonimplication | formula_8\nWhile propositional logic deals with simple declarative propositions, first-order logic additionally covers predicates and quantification. A predicate evaluates to true or false for an entity or entities in the domain of discourse.\nConsider the two sentences \"Socrates is a philosopher\" and \"Plato is a philosopher\". In propositional logic, these sentences themselves are viewed as the individuals of study, and might be denoted, for example, by variables such as \"p\" and \"q\". They are not viewed as an application of a predicate, such as formula_9, to any particular objects in the domain of discourse, instead viewing them as purely an utterance which is either true or false. However, in first-order logic, these two sentences may be framed as statements that a certain individual or non-logical object has a property. In this example, both sentences happen to have the common form formula_10 for some individual formula_11, in the first sentence the value of the variable \"x\" is \"Socrates\", and in the second sentence it is \"Plato\". Due to the ability to speak about non-logical individuals along with the original logical connectives, first-order logic includes propositional logic.\nThe truth of a formula such as \"\"x\" is a philosopher\" depends on which object is denoted by \"x\" and on the interpretation of the predicate \"is a philosopher\". Consequently, \"\"x\" is a philosopher\" alone does not have a definite truth value of true or false, and is akin to a sentence fragment. Relationships between predicates can be stated using logical connectives. For example, the first-order formula \"if \"x\" is a philosopher, then \"x\" is a scholar\", is a conditional statement with \"\"x\" is a philosopher\" as its hypothesis, and \"\"x\" is a scholar\" as its conclusion, which again needs specification of \"x\" in order to have a definite truth value.\nQuantifiers can be applied to variables in a formula. The variable \"x\" in the previous formula can be universally quantified, for instance, with the first-order sentence \"For every \"x\", if \"x\" is a philosopher, then \"x\" is a scholar\". The universal quantifier \"for every\" in this sentence expresses the idea that the claim \"if \"x\" is a philosopher, then \"x\" is a scholar\" holds for \"all\" choices of \"x\".\nThe \"negation\" of the sentence \"For every \"x\", if \"x\" is a philosopher, then \"x\" is a scholar\" is logically equivalent to the sentence \"There exists \"x\" such that \"x\" is a philosopher and \"x\" is not a scholar\". The existential quantifier \"there exists\" expresses the idea that the claim \"\"x\" is a philosopher and \"x\" is not a scholar\" holds for \"some\" choice of \"x\".\nThe predicates \"is a philosopher\" and \"is a scholar\" each take a single variable. In general, predicates can take several variables. In the first-order sentence \"Socrates is the teacher of Plato\", the predicate \"is the teacher of\" takes two variables.\nAn interpretation (or model) of a first-order formula specifies what each predicate means, and the entities that can instantiate the variables. These entities form the domain of discourse or universe, which is usually required to be a nonempty set. For example, consider the sentence \"There exists \"x\" such that \"x\" is a philosopher.\" This sentence is seen as being true in an interpretation such that the domain of discourse consists of all human beings, and that the predicate \"is a philosopher\" is understood as \"was the author of the \"Republic\".\" It is true, as witnessed by Plato in that text.\nThere are two key parts of first-order logic. The syntax determines which finite sequences of symbols are well-formed expressions in first-order logic, while the semantics determines the meanings behind these expressions.\nSyntax.\nUnlike natural languages, such as English, the language of first-order logic is completely formal, so that it can be mechanically determined whether a given expression is well formed. There are two key types of well-formed expressions: \"terms\", which intuitively represent objects, and \"formulas\", which intuitively express statements that can be true or false. The terms and formulas of first-order logic are strings of \"symbols\", where all the symbols together form the \"alphabet\" of the language. \nAlphabet.\nAs with all formal languages, the nature of the symbols themselves is outside the scope of formal logic; they are often regarded simply as letters and punctuation symbols.\nIt is common to divide the symbols of the alphabet into \"logical symbols\", which always have the same meaning, and \"non-logical symbols\", whose meaning varies by interpretation. For example, the logical symbol formula_12 always represents \"and\"; it is never interpreted as \"or\", which is represented by the logical symbol formula_13. However, a non-logical predicate symbol such as Phil(\"x\") could be interpreted to mean \"\"x\" is a philosopher\", \"\"x\" is a man named Philip\", or any other unary predicate depending on the interpretation at hand.\nLogical symbols.\nLogical symbols are a set of characters that vary by author, but usually include the following:\n (see below).\nNot all of these symbols are required in first-order logic. Either one of the quantifiers along with negation, conjunction (or disjunction), variables, brackets, and equality suffices.\nOther logical symbols include the following:\nNon-logical symbols.\nNon-logical symbols represent predicates (relations), functions and constants. It used to be standard practice to use a fixed, infinite set of non-logical symbols for all purposes:\nWhen the arity of a predicate symbol or function symbol is clear from context, the superscript \"n\" is often omitted.\nIn this traditional approach, there is only one language of first-order logic. This approach is still common, especially in philosophically oriented books.\nA more recent practice is to use different non-logical symbols according to the application one has in mind. Therefore, it has become necessary to name the set of all non-logical symbols used in a particular application. This choice is made via a \"signature\".\nTypical signatures in mathematics are {1, \u00d7} or just {\u00d7} for groups, or {0, 1, +, \u00d7, &lt;} for ordered fields. There are no restrictions on the number of non-logical symbols. The signature can be empty, finite, or infinite, even uncountable. Uncountable signatures occur for example in modern proofs of the L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem.\nThough signatures might in some cases imply how non-logical symbols are to be interpreted, interpretation of the non-logical symbols in the signature is separate (and not necessarily fixed). Signatures concern syntax rather than semantics.\nIn this approach, every non-logical symbol is of one of the following types:\nThe traditional approach can be recovered in the modern approach, by simply specifying the \"custom\" signature to consist of the traditional sequences of non-logical symbols.\nFormation rules.\nThe formation rules define the terms and formulas of first-order logic. When terms and formulas are represented as strings of symbols, these rules can be used to write a formal grammar for terms and formulas. These rules are generally context-free (each production has a single symbol on the left side), except that the set of symbols may be allowed to be infinite and there may be many start symbols, for example the variables in the case of terms.\nTerms.\nThe set of \"terms\" is inductively defined by the following rules:\nOnly expressions which can be obtained by finitely many applications of rules 1 and 2 are terms. For example, no expression involving a predicate symbol is a term.\nFormulas.\nThe set of \"formulas\" (also called \"well-formed formulas\" or \"WFFs\") is inductively defined by the following rules:\nOnly expressions which can be obtained by finitely many applications of rules 1\u20134 are formulas. The formulas obtained from the first two rules are said to be \"atomic formulas\".\nFor example:\nformula_24\nis a formula, if \"f\" is a unary function symbol, \"P\" a unary predicate symbol, and Q a ternary predicate symbol. However, formula_25 is not a formula, although it is a string of symbols from the alphabet.\nThe role of the parentheses in the definition is to ensure that any formula can only be obtained in one way\u2014by following the inductive definition (i.e., there is a unique parse tree for each formula). This property is known as \"unique readability\" of formulas. There are many conventions for where parentheses are used in formulas. For example, some authors use colons or full stops instead of parentheses, or change the places in which parentheses are inserted. Each author's particular definition must be accompanied by a proof of unique readability.\nNotational conventions.\nFor convenience, conventions have been developed about the precedence of the logical operators, to avoid the need to write parentheses in some cases. These rules are similar to the order of operations in arithmetic. A common convention is:\nMoreover, extra punctuation not required by the definition may be inserted\u2014to make formulas easier to read. Thus the formula:\nformula_31\nmight be written as:\nformula_32\nFree and bound variables.\nIn a formula, a variable may occur \"free\" or \"bound\" (or both). One formalization of this notion is due to Quine, first the concept of a variable occurrence is defined, then whether a variable occurrence is free or bound, then whether a variable symbol overall is free or bound. In order to distinguish different occurrences of the identical symbol \"x\", each occurrence of a variable symbol \"x\" in a formula \u03c6 is identified with the initial substring of \u03c6 up to the point at which said instance of the symbol \"x\" appears.p.\u00a0297 Then, an occurrence of \"x\" is said to be bound if that occurrence of \"x\" lies within the scope of at least one of either formula_33 or formula_34. Finally, \"x\" is bound in \u03c6 if all occurrences of \"x\" in \u03c6 are bound.pp.\u00a0142\u2013143\nIntuitively, a variable symbol is free in a formula if at no point is it quantified:pp.\u00a0142\u2013143 in \u2200\"y\" \"P\"(\"x\", \"y\"), the sole occurrence of variable \"x\" is free while that of \"y\" is bound. The free and bound variable occurrences in a formula are defined inductively as follows.\nFor example, in \u2200\"x\" \u2200\"y\" (\"P\"(\"x\") \u2192 \"Q\"(\"x\",\"f\"(\"x\"),\"z\")), \"x\" and \"y\" occur only bound, \"z\" occurs only free, and \"w\" is neither because it does not occur in the formula.\nFree and bound variables of a formula need not be disjoint sets: in the formula \"P\"(\"x\") \u2192 \u2200\"x\" \"Q\"(\"x\"), the first occurrence of \"x\", as argument of \"P\", is free while the second one, as argument of \"Q\", is bound.\nA formula in first-order logic with no free variable occurrences is called a \"first-order sentence\". These are the formulas that will have well-defined truth values under an interpretation. For example, whether a formula such as Phil(\"x\") is true must depend on what \"x\" represents. But the sentence \u2203\"x\" Phil(\"x\") will be either true or false in a given interpretation.\nExample: ordered abelian groups.\nIn mathematics, the language of ordered abelian groups has one constant symbol 0, one unary function symbol \u2212, one binary function symbol +, and one binary relation symbol \u2264. Then:\nThe axioms for ordered abelian groups can be expressed as a set of sentences in the language. For example, the axiom stating that the group is commutative is usually written formula_37\nSemantics.\nAn interpretation of a first-order language assigns a denotation to each non-logical symbol (predicate symbol, function symbol, or constant symbol) in that language. It also determines a domain of discourse that specifies the range of the quantifiers. The result is that each term is assigned an object that it represents, each predicate is assigned a property of objects, and each sentence is assigned a truth value. In this way, an interpretation provides semantic meaning to the terms, predicates, and formulas of the language. The study of the interpretations of formal languages is called formal semantics. What follows is a description of the standard or Tarskian semantics for first-order logic. (It is also possible to define game semantics for first-order logic, but aside from requiring the axiom of choice, game semantics agree with Tarskian semantics for first-order logic, so game semantics will not be elaborated herein.)\nFirst-order structures.\nThe most common way of specifying an interpretation (especially in mathematics) is to specify a \"structure\" (also called a \"model\"; see below). The structure consists of a domain of discourse \"D\" and an interpretation function I mapping non-logical symbols to predicates, functions, and constants.\nThe domain of discourse \"D\" is a nonempty set of \"objects\" of some kind. Intuitively, given an interpretation, a first-order formula becomes a statement about these objects; for example, formula_38 states the existence of some object in \"D\" for which the predicate \"P\" is true (or, more precisely, for which the predicate assigned to the predicate symbol \"P\" by the interpretation is true). For example, one can take \"D\" to be the set of integers.\nNon-logical symbols are interpreted as follows:\nEvaluation of truth values.\nA formula evaluates to true or false given an interpretation and a variable assignment \u03bc that associates an element of the domain of discourse with each variable. The reason that a variable assignment is required is to give meanings to formulas with free variables, such as formula_43. The truth value of this formula changes depending on the values that \"x\" and \"y\" denote.\nFirst, the variable assignment \u03bc can be extended to all terms of the language, with the result that each term maps to a single element of the domain of discourse. The following rules are used to make this assignment:\nNext, each formula is assigned a truth value. The inductive definition used to make this assignment is called the T-schema.\nIf a formula does not contain free variables, and thus is a sentence, then the initial variable assignment does not affect its truth value. In other words, a sentence is true according to \"M\" and formula_61 if and only if it is true according to \"M\" and every other variable assignment formula_62.\nThere is a second common approach to defining truth values that does not rely on variable assignment functions. Instead, given an interpretation \"M\", one first adds to the signature a collection of constant symbols, one for each element of the domain of discourse in \"M\"; say that for each \"d\" in the domain the constant symbol \"c\"\"d\" is fixed. The interpretation is extended so that each new constant symbol is assigned to its corresponding element of the domain. One now defines truth for quantified formulas syntactically, as follows:\nThis alternate approach gives exactly the same truth values to all sentences as the approach via variable assignments.\nValidity, satisfiability, and logical consequence.\nIf a sentence \u03c6 evaluates to \"true\" under a given interpretation \"M\", one says that \"M\" \"satisfies\" \u03c6; this is denoted formula_78. A sentence is \"satisfiable\" if there is some interpretation under which it is true. This is a bit different from the symbol formula_79 from model theory, where formula_80 denotes satisfiability in a model, i.e. \"there is a suitable assignment of values in formula_81's domain to variable symbols of formula_82\".\nSatisfiability of formulas with free variables is more complicated, because an interpretation on its own does not determine the truth value of such a formula. The most common convention is that a formula \u03c6 with free variables formula_83, ..., formula_84 is said to be satisfied by an interpretation if the formula \u03c6 remains true regardless which individuals from the domain of discourse are assigned to its free variables formula_83, ..., formula_84. This has the same effect as saying that a formula \u03c6 is satisfied if and only if its universal closure formula_87 is satisfied.\nA formula is \"logically valid\" (or simply \"valid\") if it is true in every interpretation. These formulas play a role similar to tautologies in propositional logic.\nA formula \u03c6 is a \"logical consequence\" of a formula \u03c8 if every interpretation that makes \u03c8 true also makes \u03c6 true. In this case one says that \u03c6 is logically implied by \u03c8.\nAlgebraizations.\nAn alternate approach to the semantics of first-order logic proceeds via abstract algebra. This approach generalizes the Lindenbaum\u2013Tarski algebras of propositional logic. There are three ways of eliminating quantified variables from first-order logic that do not involve replacing quantifiers with other variable binding term operators:\nThese algebras are all lattices that properly extend the two-element Boolean algebra.\nTarski and Givant (1987) showed that the fragment of first-order logic that has no atomic sentence lying in the scope of more than three quantifiers has the same expressive power as relation algebra. This fragment is of great interest because it suffices for Peano arithmetic and most axiomatic set theory, including the canonical Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (ZFC). They also prove that first-order logic with a primitive ordered pair is equivalent to a relation algebra with two ordered pair projection functions.\nFirst-order theories, models, and elementary classes.\nA \"first-order theory\" of a particular signature is a set of axioms, which are sentences consisting of symbols from that signature. The set of axioms is often finite or recursively enumerable, in which case the theory is called \"effective\". Some authors require theories to also include all logical consequences of the axioms. The axioms are considered to hold within the theory and from them other sentences that hold within the theory can be derived.\nA first-order structure that satisfies all sentences in a given theory is said to be a \"model\" of the theory. An \"elementary class\" is the set of all structures satisfying a particular theory. These classes are a main subject of study in model theory.\nMany theories have an \"intended interpretation\", a certain model that is kept in mind when studying the theory. For example, the intended interpretation of Peano arithmetic consists of the usual natural numbers with their usual operations. However, the L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem shows that most first-order theories will also have other, nonstandard models.\nA theory is \"consistent\" (within a deductive system) if it is not possible to prove a contradiction from the axioms of the theory. A theory is \"complete\" if, for every formula in its signature, either that formula or its negation is a logical consequence of the axioms of the theory. G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem shows that effective first-order theories that include a sufficient portion of the arithmetic of the natural numbers can never be both consistent and complete.\nEmpty domains.\nThe definition above requires that the domain of discourse of any interpretation must be nonempty. There are settings, such as inclusive logic, where empty domains are permitted. Moreover, if a class of algebraic structures includes an empty structure (for example, there is an empty poset), that class can only be an elementary class in first-order logic if empty domains are permitted or the empty structure is removed from the class.\nThere are several difficulties with empty domains, however:\nThus, when the empty domain is permitted, it must often be treated as a special case. Most authors, however, simply exclude the empty domain by definition.\nDeductive systems.\nA \"deductive system\" is used to demonstrate, on a purely syntactic basis, that one formula is a logical consequence of another formula. There are many such systems for first-order logic, including Hilbert-style deductive systems, natural deduction, the sequent calculus, the tableaux method, and resolution. These share the common property that a deduction is a finite syntactic object; the format of this object, and the way it is constructed, vary widely. These finite deductions themselves are often called \"derivations\" in proof theory. They are also often called \"proofs\" but are completely formalized unlike natural-language mathematical proofs.\nA deductive system is \"sound\" if any formula that can be derived in the system is logically valid. Conversely, a deductive system is \"complete\" if every logically valid formula is derivable. All of the systems discussed in this article are both sound and complete. They also share the property that it is possible to effectively verify that a purportedly valid deduction is actually a deduction; such deduction systems are called \"effective\".\nA key property of deductive systems is that they are purely syntactic, so that derivations can be verified without considering any interpretation. Thus, a sound argument is correct in every possible interpretation of the language, regardless of whether that interpretation is about mathematics, economics, or some other area.\nIn general, logical consequence in first-order logic is only semidecidable: if a sentence A logically implies a sentence B then this can be discovered (for example, by searching for a proof until one is found, using some effective, sound, complete proof system). However, if A does not logically imply B, this does not mean that A logically implies the negation of B. There is no effective procedure that, given formulas A and B, always correctly decides whether A logically implies B.\nRules of inference.\nA \"rule of inference\" states that, given a particular formula (or set of formulas) with a certain property as a hypothesis, another specific formula (or set of formulas) can be derived as a conclusion. The rule is sound (or truth-preserving) if it preserves validity in the sense that whenever any interpretation satisfies the hypothesis, that interpretation also satisfies the conclusion.\nFor example, one common rule of inference is the \"rule of substitution\". If \"t\" is a term and \u03c6 is a formula possibly containing the variable \"x\", then \u03c6[\"t\"/\"x\"] is the result of replacing all free instances of \"x\" by \"t\" in \u03c6. The substitution rule states that for any \u03c6 and any term \"t\", one can conclude \u03c6[\"t\"/\"x\"] from \u03c6 provided that no free variable of \"t\" becomes bound during the substitution process. (If some free variable of \"t\" becomes bound, then to substitute \"t\" for \"x\" it is first necessary to change the bound variables of \u03c6 to differ from the free variables of \"t\".)\nTo see why the restriction on bound variables is necessary, consider the logically valid formula \u03c6 given by formula_91, in the signature of (0,1,+,\u00d7,=) of arithmetic. If \"t\" is the term \"x + 1\", the formula \u03c6[\"t\"/\"y\"] is formula_92, which will be false in many interpretations. The problem is that the free variable \"x\" of \"t\" became bound during the substitution. The intended replacement can be obtained by renaming the bound variable \"x\" of \u03c6 to something else, say \"z\", so that the formula after substitution is formula_93, which is again logically valid.\nThe substitution rule demonstrates several common aspects of rules of inference. It is entirely syntactical; one can tell whether it was correctly applied without appeal to any interpretation. It has (syntactically defined) limitations on when it can be applied, which must be respected to preserve the correctness of derivations. Moreover, as is often the case, these limitations are necessary because of interactions between free and bound variables that occur during syntactic manipulations of the formulas involved in the inference rule.\nHilbert-style systems and natural deduction.\nA deduction in a Hilbert-style deductive system is a list of formulas, each of which is a \"logical axiom\", a hypothesis that has been assumed for the derivation at hand or follows from previous formulas via a rule of inference. The logical axioms consist of several axiom schemas of logically valid formulas; these encompass a significant amount of propositional logic. The rules of inference enable the manipulation of quantifiers. Typical Hilbert-style systems have a small number of rules of inference, along with several infinite schemas of logical axioms. It is common to have only modus ponens and universal generalization as rules of inference.\nNatural deduction systems resemble Hilbert-style systems in that a deduction is a finite list of formulas. However, natural deduction systems have no logical axioms; they compensate by adding additional rules of inference that can be used to manipulate the logical connectives in formulas in the proof.\nSequent calculus.\nThe sequent calculus was developed to study the properties of natural deduction systems. Instead of working with one formula at a time, it uses \"sequents\", which are expressions of the form:\nformula_94\nwhere A1, ..., A\"n\", B1, ..., B\"k\" are formulas and the turnstile symbol formula_95 is used as punctuation to separate the two halves. Intuitively, a sequent expresses the idea that formula_96 implies formula_97.\nTableaux method.\nUnlike the methods just described the derivations in the tableaux method are not lists of formulas. Instead, a derivation is a tree of formulas. To show that a formula A is provable, the tableaux method attempts to demonstrate that the negation of A is unsatisfiable. The tree of the derivation has formula_98 at its root; the tree branches in a way that reflects the structure of the formula. For example, to show that formula_99 is unsatisfiable requires showing that C and D are each unsatisfiable; this corresponds to a branching point in the tree with parent formula_99 and children C and D.\nResolution.\nThe resolution rule is a single rule of inference that, together with unification, is sound and complete for first-order logic. As with the tableaux method, a formula is proved by showing that the negation of the formula is unsatisfiable. Resolution is commonly used in automated theorem proving.\nThe resolution method works only with formulas that are disjunctions of atomic formulas; arbitrary formulas must first be converted to this form through Skolemization. The resolution rule states that from the hypotheses formula_101 and formula_102, the conclusion formula_103 can be obtained.\nProvable identities.\nMany identities can be proved, which establish equivalences between particular formulas. These identities allow for rearranging formulas by moving quantifiers across other connectives and are useful for putting formulas in prenex normal form. Some provable identities include:\nformula_104\nformula_105\nformula_106\nformula_107\nformula_108\nformula_109\nformula_110 (where formula_11 must not occur free in formula_53)\nformula_113 (where formula_11 must not occur free in formula_53)\nEquality and its axioms.\nThere are several different conventions for using equality (or identity) in first-order logic. The most common convention, known as first-order logic with equality, includes the equality symbol as a primitive logical symbol which is always interpreted as the real equality relation between members of the domain of discourse, such that the \"two\" given members are the same member. This approach also adds certain axioms about equality to the deductive system employed. These equality axioms are:\nThese are axiom schemas, each of which specifies an infinite set of axioms. The third schema is known as \"Leibniz's law\", \"the principle of substitutivity\", \"the indiscernibility of identicals\", or \"the replacement property\". The second schema, involving the function symbol \"f\", is (equivalent to) a special case of the third schema, using the formula: \n\u03c6(z): \"f\"(..., \"x\", ...) = \"f\"(..., \"z\", ...)\nThen\n\"x\" = \"y\" \u2192 (\"f\"(..., \"x\", ...) = \"f\"(..., \"x\", ...) \u2192 \"f\"(..., \"x\", ...) = \"f\"(..., \"y\", ...)).\nSince \"x\" = \"y\" is given, and \"f\"(..., \"x\", ...) = \"f\"(..., \"x\", ...) true by reflexivity, we have \"f\"(..., \"x\", ...) = \"f\"(..., \"y\", ...)\nMany other properties of equality are consequences of the axioms above, for example:\nFirst-order logic without equality.\nAn alternate approach considers the equality relation to be a non-logical symbol. This convention is known as \"first-order logic without equality\". If an equality relation is included in the signature, the axioms of equality must now be added to the theories under consideration, if desired, instead of being considered rules of logic. The main difference between this method and first-order logic with equality is that an interpretation may now interpret two distinct individuals as \"equal\" (although, by Leibniz's law, these will satisfy exactly the same formulas under any interpretation). That is, the equality relation may now be interpreted by an arbitrary equivalence relation on the domain of discourse that is congruent with respect to the functions and relations of the interpretation.\nWhen this second convention is followed, the term \"normal model\" is used to refer to an interpretation where no distinct individuals \"a\" and \"b\" satisfy \"a\" = \"b\". In first-order logic with equality, only normal models are considered, and so there is no term for a model other than a normal model. When first-order logic without equality is studied, it is necessary to amend the statements of results such as the L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem so that only normal models are considered.\nFirst-order logic without equality is often employed in the context of second-order arithmetic and other higher-order theories of arithmetic, where the equality relation between sets of natural numbers is usually omitted.\nDefining equality within a theory.\nIf a theory has a binary formula \"A\"(\"x\",\"y\") which satisfies reflexivity and Leibniz's law, the theory is said to have equality, or to be a theory with equality. The theory may not have all instances of the above schemas as axioms, but rather as derivable theorems. For example, in theories with no function symbols and a finite number of relations, it is possible to define equality in terms of the relations, by defining the two terms \"s\" and \"t\" to be equal if any relation is unchanged by changing \"s\" to \"t\" in any argument.\nSome theories allow other \"ad hoc\" definitions of equality:\nMetalogical properties.\nOne motivation for the use of first-order logic, rather than higher-order logic, is that first-order logic has many metalogical properties that stronger logics do not have. These results concern general properties of first-order logic itself, rather than properties of individual theories. They provide fundamental tools for the construction of models of first-order theories.\nCompleteness and undecidability.\nG\u00f6del's completeness theorem, proved by Kurt G\u00f6del in 1929, establishes that there are sound, complete, effective deductive systems for first-order logic, and thus the first-order logical consequence relation is captured by finite provability. Naively, the statement that a formula \u03c6 logically implies a formula \u03c8 depends on every model of \u03c6; these models will in general be of arbitrarily large cardinality, and so logical consequence cannot be effectively verified by checking every model. However, it is possible to enumerate all finite derivations and search for a derivation of \u03c8 from \u03c6. If \u03c8 is logically implied by \u03c6, such a derivation will eventually be found. Thus first-order logical consequence is semidecidable: it is possible to make an effective enumeration of all pairs of sentences (\u03c6,\u03c8) such that \u03c8 is a logical consequence of\u00a0\u03c6.\nUnlike propositional logic, first-order logic is undecidable (although semidecidable), provided that the language has at least one predicate of arity at least 2 (other than equality). This means that there is no decision procedure that determines whether arbitrary formulas are logically valid. This result was established independently by Alonzo Church and Alan Turing in 1936 and 1937, respectively, giving a negative answer to the Entscheidungsproblem posed by David Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann in 1928. Their proofs demonstrate a connection between the unsolvability of the decision problem for first-order logic and the unsolvability of the halting problem.\nThere are systems weaker than full first-order logic for which the logical consequence relation is decidable. These include propositional logic and monadic predicate logic, which is first-order logic restricted to unary predicate symbols and no function symbols. Other logics with no function symbols which are decidable are the guarded fragment of first-order logic, as well as two-variable logic. The Bernays\u2013Sch\u00f6nfinkel class of first-order formulas is also decidable. Decidable subsets of first-order logic are also studied in the framework of description logics.\nThe L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem.\nThe L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem shows that if a first-order theory of cardinality \u03bb has an infinite model, then it has models of every infinite cardinality greater than or equal to \u03bb. One of the earliest results in model theory, it implies that it is not possible to characterize countability or uncountability in a first-order language with a countable signature. That is, there is no first-order formula \u03c6(\"x\") such that an arbitrary structure M satisfies \u03c6 if and only if the domain of discourse of M is countable (or, in the second case, uncountable).\nThe L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem implies that infinite structures cannot be categorically axiomatized in first-order logic. For example, there is no first-order theory whose only model is the real line: any first-order theory with an infinite model also has a model of cardinality larger than the continuum. Since the real line is infinite, any theory satisfied by the real line is also satisfied by some nonstandard models. When the L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem is applied to first-order set theories, the nonintuitive consequences are known as Skolem's paradox.\nThe compactness theorem.\nThe compactness theorem states that a set of first-order sentences has a model if and only if every finite subset of it has a model. This implies that if a formula is a logical consequence of an infinite set of first-order axioms, then it is a logical consequence of some finite number of those axioms. This theorem was proved first by Kurt G\u00f6del as a consequence of the completeness theorem, but many additional proofs have been obtained over time. It is a central tool in model theory, providing a fundamental method for constructing models.\nThe compactness theorem has a limiting effect on which collections of first-order structures are elementary classes. For example, the compactness theorem implies that any theory that has arbitrarily large finite models has an infinite model. Thus, the class of all finite graphs is not an elementary class (the same holds for many other algebraic structures).\nThere are also more subtle limitations of first-order logic that are implied by the compactness theorem. For example, in computer science, many situations can be modeled as a directed graph of states (nodes) and connections (directed edges). Validating such a system may require showing that no \"bad\" state can be reached from any \"good\" state. Thus, one seeks to determine if the good and bad states are in different connected components of the graph. However, the compactness theorem can be used to show that connected graphs are not an elementary class in first-order logic, and there is no formula \u03c6(\"x\",\"y\") of first-order logic, in the logic of graphs, that expresses the idea that there is a path from \"x\" to \"y\". Connectedness can be expressed in second-order logic, however, but not with only existential set quantifiers, as formula_120 also enjoys compactness.\nLindstr\u00f6m's theorem.\nPer Lindstr\u00f6m showed that the metalogical properties just discussed actually characterize first-order logic in the sense that no stronger logic can also have those properties (Ebbinghaus and Flum 1994, Chapter XIII). Lindstr\u00f6m defined a class of abstract logical systems, and a rigorous definition of the relative strength of a member of this class. He established two theorems for systems of this type:\nLimitations.\nAlthough first-order logic is sufficient for formalizing much of mathematics and is commonly used in computer science and other fields, it has certain limitations. These include limitations on its expressiveness and limitations of the fragments of natural languages that it can describe.\nFor instance, first-order logic is undecidable, meaning a sound, complete and terminating decision algorithm for provability is impossible. This has led to the study of interesting decidable fragments, such as C2: first-order logic with two variables and the counting quantifiers formula_121 and formula_122.\nExpressiveness.\nThe L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem shows that if a first-order theory has any infinite model, then it has infinite models of every cardinality. In particular, no first-order theory with an infinite model can be categorical. Thus, there is no first-order theory whose only model has the set of natural numbers as its domain, or whose only model has the set of real numbers as its domain. Many extensions of first-order logic, including infinitary logics and higher-order logics, are more expressive in the sense that they do permit categorical axiomatizations of the natural numbers or real numbers. This expressiveness comes at a metalogical cost, however: by Lindstr\u00f6m's theorem, the compactness theorem and the downward L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem cannot hold in any logic stronger than first-order.\nFormalizing natural languages.\nFirst-order logic is able to formalize many simple quantifier constructions in natural language, such as \"every person who lives in Perth lives in Australia\". Hence, first-order logic is used as a basis for knowledge representation languages, such as FO(.).\nStill, there are complicated features of natural language that cannot be expressed in first-order logic. \"Any logical system which is appropriate as an instrument for the analysis of natural language needs a much richer structure than first-order predicate logic\".\nRestrictions, extensions, and variations.\nThere are many variations of first-order logic. Some of these are inessential in the sense that they merely change notation without affecting the semantics. Others change the expressive power more significantly, by extending the semantics through additional quantifiers or other new logical symbols. For example, infinitary logics permit formulas of infinite size, and modal logics add symbols for possibility and necessity.\nRestricted languages.\nFirst-order logic can be studied in languages with fewer logical symbols than were described above:\nRestrictions such as these are useful as a technique to reduce the number of inference rules or axiom schemas in deductive systems, which leads to shorter proofs of metalogical results. The cost of the restrictions is that it becomes more difficult to express natural-language statements in the formal system at hand, because the logical connectives used in the natural language statements must be replaced by their (longer) definitions in terms of the restricted collection of logical connectives. Similarly, derivations in the limited systems may be longer than derivations in systems that include additional connectives. There is thus a trade-off between the ease of working within the formal system and the ease of proving results about the formal system.\nIt is also possible to restrict the arities of function symbols and predicate symbols, in sufficiently expressive theories. One can in principle dispense entirely with functions of arity greater than 2 and predicates of arity greater than 1 in theories that include a pairing function. This is a function of arity 2 that takes pairs of elements of the domain and returns an ordered pair containing them. It is also sufficient to have two predicate symbols of arity 2 that define projection functions from an ordered pair to its components. In either case it is necessary that the natural axioms for a pairing function and its projections are satisfied.\nMany-sorted logic.\nOrdinary first-order interpretations have a single domain of discourse over which all quantifiers range. \"Many-sorted first-order logic\" allows variables to have different \"sorts\", which have different domains. This is also called \"typed first-order logic\", and the sorts called \"types\" (as in data type), but it is not the same as first-order type theory. Many-sorted first-order logic is often used in the study of second-order arithmetic.\nWhen there are only finitely many sorts in a theory, many-sorted first-order logic can be reduced to single-sorted first-order logic.\nOne introduces into the single-sorted theory a unary predicate symbol for each sort in the many-sorted theory and adds an axiom saying that these unary predicates partition the domain of discourse. For example, if there are two sorts, one adds predicate symbols formula_149 and formula_150 and the axiom:\nformula_151.\nThen the elements satisfying formula_152 are thought of as elements of the first sort, and elements satisfying formula_153 as elements of the second sort. One can quantify over each sort by using the corresponding predicate symbol to limit the range of quantification. For example, to say there is an element of the first sort satisfying formula formula_154, one writes:\nformula_155.\nAdditional quantifiers.\nAdditional quantifiers can be added to first-order logic.\nInfinitary logics.\nInfinitary logic allows infinitely long sentences. For example, one may allow a conjunction or disjunction of infinitely many formulas, or quantification over infinitely many variables. Infinitely long sentences arise in areas of mathematics including topology and model theory.\nInfinitary logic generalizes first-order logic to allow formulas of infinite length. The most common way in which formulas can become infinite is through infinite conjunctions and disjunctions. However, it is also possible to admit generalized signatures in which function and relation symbols are allowed to have infinite arities, or in which quantifiers can bind infinitely many variables. Because an infinite formula cannot be represented by a finite string, it is necessary to choose some other representation of formulas; the usual representation in this context is a tree. Thus, formulas are, essentially, identified with their parse trees, rather than with the strings being parsed.\nThe most commonly studied infinitary logics are denoted \"L\"\u03b1\u03b2, where \u03b1 and \u03b2 are each either cardinal numbers or the symbol \u221e. In this notation, ordinary first-order logic is \"L\"\u03c9\u03c9.\nIn the logic \"L\"\u221e\u03c9, arbitrary conjunctions or disjunctions are allowed when building formulas, and there is an unlimited supply of variables. More generally, the logic that permits conjunctions or disjunctions with less than \u03ba constituents is known as \"L\"\u03ba\u03c9. For example, \"L\"\u03c91\u03c9 permits countable conjunctions and disjunctions.\nThe set of free variables in a formula of \"L\"\u03ba\u03c9 can have any cardinality strictly less than \u03ba, yet only finitely many of them can be in the scope of any quantifier when a formula appears as a subformula of another. In other infinitary logics, a subformula may be in the scope of infinitely many quantifiers. For example, in \"L\"\u03ba\u221e, a single universal or existential quantifier may bind arbitrarily many variables simultaneously. Similarly, the logic \"L\"\u03ba\u03bb permits simultaneous quantification over fewer than \u03bb variables, as well as conjunctions and disjunctions of size less than \u03ba.\nFixpoint logic.\nFixpoint logic extends first-order logic by adding the closure under the least fixed points of positive operators.\nHigher-order logics.\nThe characteristic feature of first-order logic is that individuals can be quantified, but not predicates. Thus\nformula_157\nis a legal first-order formula, but\nformula_158\nis not, in most formalizations of first-order logic. Second-order logic extends first-order logic by adding the latter type of quantification. Other higher-order logics allow quantification over even higher types than second-order logic permits. These higher types include relations between relations, functions from relations to relations between relations, and other higher-type objects. Thus the \"first\" in first-order logic describes the type of objects that can be quantified.\nUnlike first-order logic, for which only one semantics is studied, there are several possible semantics for second-order logic. The most commonly employed semantics for second-order and higher-order logic is known as \"full semantics\". The combination of additional quantifiers and the full semantics for these quantifiers makes higher-order logic stronger than first-order logic. In particular, the (semantic) logical consequence relation for second-order and higher-order logic is not semidecidable; there is no effective deduction system for second-order logic that is sound and complete under full semantics.\nSecond-order logic with full semantics is more expressive than first-order logic. For example, it is possible to create axiom systems in second-order logic that uniquely characterize the natural numbers and the real line. The cost of this expressiveness is that second-order and higher-order logics have fewer attractive metalogical properties than first-order logic. For example, the L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem and compactness theorem of first-order logic become false when generalized to higher-order logics with full semantics.\nAutomated theorem proving and formal methods.\nAutomated theorem proving refers to the development of computer programs that search and find derivations (formal proofs) of mathematical theorems. Finding derivations is a difficult task because the search space can be very large; an exhaustive search of every possible derivation is theoretically possible but computationally infeasible for many systems of interest in mathematics. Thus complicated heuristic functions are developed to attempt to find a derivation in less time than a blind search.\nThe related area of automated proof verification uses computer programs to check that human-created proofs are correct. Unlike complicated automated theorem provers, verification systems may be small enough that their correctness can be checked both by hand and through automated software verification. This validation of the proof verifier is needed to give confidence that any derivation labeled as \"correct\" is actually correct.\nSome proof verifiers, such as Metamath, insist on having a complete derivation as input. Others, such as Mizar and Isabelle, take a well-formatted proof sketch (which may still be very long and detailed) and fill in the missing pieces by doing simple proof searches or applying known decision procedures: the resulting derivation is then verified by a small core \"kernel\". Many such systems are primarily intended for interactive use by human mathematicians: these are known as proof assistants. They may also use formal logics that are stronger than first-order logic, such as type theory. Because a full derivation of any nontrivial result in a first-order deductive system will be extremely long for a human to write, results are often formalized as a series of lemmas, for which derivations can be constructed separately.\nAutomated theorem provers are also used to implement formal verification in computer science. In this setting, theorem provers are used to verify the correctness of programs and of hardware such as processors with respect to a formal specification. Because such analysis is time-consuming and thus expensive, it is usually reserved for projects in which a malfunction would have grave human or financial consequences.\nFor the problem of model checking, efficient algorithms are known to decide whether an input finite structure satisfies a first-order formula, in addition to computational complexity bounds: see .\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10984", "revid": "15908771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10984", "title": "First-order predicate calculus", "text": ""}
{"id": "10986", "revid": "5717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10986", "title": "First-order predicate logic", "text": ""}
{"id": "10987", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10987", "title": "Functor", "text": "Mapping between categories\nIn mathematics, specifically category theory, a functor is a mapping between categories. Functors were first considered in algebraic topology, where algebraic objects (such as the fundamental group) are associated to topological spaces, and maps between these algebraic objects are associated to continuous maps between spaces. Nowadays, functors are used throughout modern mathematics to relate various categories. Thus, functors are important in every area of mathematics where category theory is applied.\nThe words \"category\" and \"functor\" were borrowed by mathematicians from the philosophers Aristotle and Rudolf Carnap, respectively. The latter used \"functor\" in a linguistic context;\nsee function word.\nDefinition.\nLet \"C\" and \"D\" be categories. A functor \"F\" from \"C\" to \"D\" is a mapping that:\nThat is, functors must preserve identity morphisms and composition of morphisms.\nCovariance and contravariance.\nThere are many constructions in mathematics that would be functors but for the fact that they \"turn morphisms around\" and \"reverse composition\". We then define a contravariant functor \"F\" from \"C\" to \"D\" as a mapping that\nVariance of functor (composite)\nNote that contravariant functors reverse the direction of composition.\nOrdinary functors are also called covariant functors in order to distinguish them from contravariant ones. Note that one can also define a contravariant functor as a \"covariant\" functor on the opposite category formula_23. Some authors prefer to write all expressions covariantly. That is, instead of saying formula_24 is a contravariant functor, they simply write formula_25 (or sometimes formula_26) and call it a functor.\nContravariant functors are also occasionally called \"cofunctors\".\nThere is a convention which refers to \"vectors\"\u2014i.e., vector fields, elements of the space of sections formula_27 of a tangent bundle formula_28\u2014as \"contravariant\" and to \"covectors\"\u2014i.e., 1-forms, elements of the space of sections formula_29 of a cotangent bundle formula_30\u2014as \"covariant\". This terminology originates in physics, and its rationale has to do with the position of the indices (\"upstairs\" and \"downstairs\") in expressions such as formula_31 for formula_32 or formula_33 for formula_34 In this formalism it is observed that the coordinate transformation symbol formula_35 (representing the matrix formula_36) acts on the \"covector coordinates\" \"in the same way\" as on the basis vectors: formula_37\u2014whereas it acts \"in the opposite way\" on the \"vector coordinates\" (but \"in the same way\" as on the basis covectors: formula_38). This terminology is contrary to the one used in category theory because it is the covectors that have \"pullbacks\" in general and are thus \"contravariant\", whereas vectors in general are \"covariant\" since they can be \"pushed forward\". See also Covariance and contravariance of vectors.\nOpposite functor.\nEvery functor formula_24 induces the opposite functor formula_40, where formula_23 and formula_42 are the opposite categories to formula_43 and formula_44. By definition, formula_45 maps objects and morphisms in the identical way as does formula_46. Since formula_23 does not coincide with formula_43 as a category, and similarly for formula_44, formula_45 is distinguished from formula_46. For example, when composing formula_52 with formula_53, one should use either formula_54 or formula_55. Note that, following the property of opposite category, formula_56.\nBifunctors and multifunctors.\nA bifunctor (also known as a binary functor) is a functor whose domain is a product category. For example, the Hom functor is of the type \"Cop\" \u00d7 \"C\" \u2192 Set. It can be seen as a functor in \"two\" arguments; it is contravariant in one argument, covariant in the other.\nA multifunctor is a generalization of the functor concept to \"n\" variables. So, for example, a bifunctor is a multifunctor with \"n\" = 2.\nProperties.\nTwo important consequences of the functor axioms are:\nOne can compose functors, i.e. if \"F\" is a functor from \"A\" to \"B\" and \"G\" is a functor from \"B\" to \"C\" then one can form the composite functor \"G\" \u2218 \"F\" from \"A\" to \"C\". Composition of functors is associative where defined. Identity of composition of functors is the identity functor. This shows that functors can be considered as morphisms in categories of categories, for example in the category of small categories.\nA small category with a single object is the same thing as a monoid: the morphisms of a one-object category can be thought of as elements of the monoid, and composition in the category is thought of as the monoid operation. Functors between one-object categories correspond to monoid homomorphisms. So in a sense, functors between arbitrary categories are a kind of generalization of monoid homomorphisms to categories with more than one object.\nRelation to other categorical concepts.\nLet \"C\" and \"D\" be categories. The collection of all functors from \"C\" to \"D\" forms the objects of a category: the functor category. Morphisms in this category are natural transformations between functors.\nFunctors are often defined by universal properties; examples are the tensor product, the direct sum and direct product of groups or vector spaces, construction of free groups and modules, direct and inverse limits. The concepts of limit and colimit generalize several of the above.\nUniversal constructions often give rise to pairs of adjoint functors.\nComputer implementations.\nFunctors sometimes appear in functional programming. For instance, the programming language Haskell has a class codice_1 where codice_2 is a polytypic function used to map functions (\"morphisms\" on \"Hask\", the category of Haskell types) between existing types to functions between some new types.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10988", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10988", "title": "Felix Housdorff", "text": ""}
{"id": "10989", "revid": "7192861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10989", "title": "Felix Hausdorff", "text": "German mathematician (1868\u20131942)\nFelix Hausdorff ( , ; November 8, 1868 \u2013 January 26, 1942) was a German mathematician, pseudonym Paul Mongr\u00e9 (\"\u00e0 mon https://\" (Fr.) = \"according to my taste\"), who is considered to be one of the founders of modern topology and who contributed significantly to set theory, descriptive set theory, measure theory, and functional analysis.\nHausdorff was Jewish, and life became difficult for him and his family after the \"Kristallnacht\" of 1938. The next year he initiated efforts to emigrate to the United States, but was unable to make arrangements to receive a research fellowship. On 26 January 1942, Hausdorff, along with his wife and his sister-in-law, died by suicide by taking an overdose of veronal, rather than comply with German orders to move to the Endenich camp, and there suffer the likely implications, about which he held no illusions.\nLife.\nChildhood and youth.\nHausdorff's father, the Jewish merchant Louis Hausdorff (1843\u20131896), moved with his young family to Leipzig in the autumn of 1870, and over time worked at various companies, including a linen-and cotton goods factory. He was an educated man and had become a Morenu at the age of 14. He wrote several treatises, including a long work on the Aramaic translations of the Bible from the perspective of Talmudic law.\nHausdorff's mother, Hedwig (1848\u20131902), who is also referred to in various documents as Johanna, came from the Jewish Tietz family. From another branch of this family came Hermann Tietz, founder of the first department store, and later co-owner of the department store chain called \"Hermann Tietz\". During the period of Nazi dictatorship the name was \"Aryanised\" to Hertie.\nFrom 1878 to 1887 Felix Hausdorff attended the Old St Nicholas School, Leipzig, a facility that had a reputation as a hotbed of humanistic education. He was an excellent student, class leader for many years and often recited self-written Latin or German poems at school celebrations.\nIn his later years of high school, choosing a main subject of study was not easy for Hausdorff. Magda Dierkesmann, who was often a guest in the home of Hausdorff in the years 1926\u20131932, reported in 1967 that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His versatile musical talent was so great that only the insistence of his father made him give up his plan to study music and become a composer.\nHe decided to study the natural sciences, and in his graduating class of 1887 he was the only one who achieved the highest possible grade.\nDegree, doctorate and Habilitation.\nFrom 1887 to 1891 Hausdorff studied mathematics and astronomy, mainly in his native city of Leipzig, interrupted by one semester in Freiburg (summer 1888) and Berlin (winter 1888/1889). Surviving testimony from other students depict him as an extremely versatile and interested young man, who, in addition to the mathematical and astronomical lectures, attended lectures in physics, chemistry and geography, and also lectures on philosophy and history of philosophy, as well as on issues of language, literature and social sciences. In Leipzig he attended lectures on the history of music from musicologist Oscar Paul. His early love of music lasted a lifetime; in Hausdorff's home he held impressive musical evenings with the landlord at the piano, according to witness statements made by various participants. Even as a student in Leipzig, he was an admirer and connoisseur of the music of Richard Wagner.\nIn later semesters of his studies, Hausdorff was close to Heinrich Bruns (1848\u20131919). \nBruns was professor of astronomy and director of the observatory at the University of Leipzig. Under his supervision, Hausdorff graduated in 1891 with a work on the theory of astronomical refraction of light in the atmosphere. Two publications on the same subject followed, and in 1895 his Habilitation also followed with a thesis on the absorbance of light in the atmosphere. These early astronomical works of Hausdorff, despite their excellent mathematical formulation, were ultimately of little importance to the scientific community.\nFor one, the underlying idea of Bruns was later shown to not be viable (there was a need for refraction observations near the astronomical horizon, and as Julius Bauschinger would show, this could not be obtained with the required accuracy). And further, the progress in the direct measurement of atmospheric data (from weather balloon ascents) has since made the painstaking accuracy of this data from refraction observations unnecessary. In the time between defending his PhD and his Habilitation, Hausdorff completed his yearlong military requirement, and worked for two years as a human computer at the observatory in Leipzig.\nLecturer in Leipzig.\nAfter his Habilitation, Hausdorff became a lecturer at the University of Leipzig where he began extensive teaching in a variety of mathematical areas. In addition to teaching and research in mathematics, he also pursued his literary and philosophical inclinations. A man of varied interests, he often associated with a number of famous writers, artists and publishers such as Hermann Conradi, Richard Dehmel, Otto Erich Hartleben, Gustav Kirstein, Max Klinger, Max Reger and Frank Wedekind. The years of 1897 to 1904 mark the high point of his literary and philosophical creativity, during which time 18 of his 22 pseudonymous works were published, including a book of poetry, a play, an epistemological book and a volume of aphorisms.\nIn 1899 Hausdorff married Charlotte Goldschmidt, the daughter of Jewish doctor Siegismund Goldschmidt. Her stepmother was the famous suffragist and preschool teacher Henriette Goldschmidt. Hausdorff's only child, his daughter Lenore (Nora), was born in 1900; she survived the era of National Socialism and enjoyed a long life, dying in Bonn in 1991.\nFirst professorship.\nIn December 1901 Hausdorff was appointed as adjunct associate professor at the University of Leipzig. An often-repeated factoid, that Hausdorff got a call from G\u00f6ttingen and rejected it, cannot be verified and is most likely wrong. After considering Hausdorff's application to Leipzig, the Dean Kirchner felt compelled to make the following addition to the very positive vote from his colleagues, written by Heinrich Bruns:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The faculty, however, considers itself obliged to report to the Royal Ministry that the above application, considered on November 2nd of this year when a faculty meeting had taken place, was not accepted by all, but with 22 votes to 7. The minority was opposed, because Dr. Hausdorff is of the Mosaic faith.\nThis quote emphasizes the undisguised antisemitism present, which especially took a sharp upturn throughout the German Reich after the stock market crash of 1873. Leipzig was a focus of antisemitic sentiment, especially among the student body, which may well be the reason that Hausdorff did not feel at ease in Leipzig. Another contributing factor may also have been the stresses due to the hierarchical posturing of the Leipzig professors.\nAfter his Habilitation, Hausdorff wrote other works on optics, on non-Euclidean geometry, and on hypercomplex number systems, as well as two papers on probability theory. However, his main area of work soon became set theory, especially the theory of ordered sets. Initially, it was only out of philosophical interest that Hausdorff began to study Georg Cantor's work, beginning around 1897, but already in 1901 Hausdorff began lecturing on set theory. His was one of the first ever lectures on set theory; only Ernst Zermelo's lectures in G\u00f6ttingen College during the winter of 1900/1901 were earlier. That same year, he published his first paper on order types in which he examined a generalization of well-orderings called graded order types, where a linear order is graded if no two of its segments share the same order type. He generalized the Cantor\u2013Bernstein theorem, which said the collection of countable order types has the cardinality of the continuum and showed that the collection of all graded types of an idempotent cardinality m has a cardinality of 2m.\nFor the summer semester of 1910 Hausdorff was appointed as professor to the University of Bonn. There he began a lecture series on set theory, which he substantially revised and expanded for the summer semester of 1912.\nIn the summer of 1912 he also began work on his magnum opus, the book \"Grundz\u00fcge der Mengenlehre\" (\"Basics of set theory\"). It was completed in Greifswald, where Hausdorff had been appointed for the summer semester as full professor in 1913, and was released in April 1914.\nThe University of Greifswald was the smallest of the Prussian universities. The mathematical institute there was also small; during the summer of 1916 and the winter of 1916/17, Hausdorff was the only mathematician in Greifswald. This meant that he was almost fully occupied in teaching basic courses. It was thus a substantial improvement for his academic career when Hausdorff was appointed in 1921 to Bonn. There he was free to teach about wider ranges of topics, and often lectured on his latest research. He gave a particularly noteworthy lecture on probability theory (NL Hausdorff: Capsule 21: Fasz 64) in the summer semester of 1923, in which he grounded the theory of probability in measure-theoretic axiomatic theory, ten years before A. N. Kolmogorov's \"Basic concepts of probability theory\" (reprinted in full in the collected works, Volume V). In Bonn, Hausdorff was friends and colleagues with Eduard Study, and later with Otto Toeplitz, who were both\noutstanding mathematicians.\nUnder the Nazi dictatorship and suicide.\nAfter the takeover by the National Socialist party, antisemitism became state doctrine. Hausdorff was not initially concerned by the \"Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service\", adopted in 1933, because he had been a German public servant since before 1914. However, he was not completely spared, as one of his lectures was interrupted by National Socialist student officials. In the winter semester of 1934/1935, there was a working session of the National Socialist German Student Union (NSDStB) at the University of Bonn, which chose \"Race and Ethnicity\" as their theme for the semester. Hausdorff cancelled his 1934/1935 winter semester Calculus III course on 20 November, and it is assumed that the choice of theme was related to the cancellation of Hausdorff's class, since in his long career as a university lecturer he had always taught his courses through to their end.\nOn March 31, 1935, after some back and forth, Hausdorff was finally given emeritus status. No words of thanks were given for his 40 years of successful work in the German higher education system.\nHis academic legacy shows that Hausdorff was still working mathematically during these increasingly difficult times, and continued to follow current developments of interest. \nHe wrote, in addition to the expanded edition of his work on set theory, seven works on topology and descriptive set theory. These were published in Polish magazines: one in \"Studia Mathematica\", the others in \"Fundamenta Mathematicae\".\nHe was supported at this time by Erich Bessel-Hagen, a loyal friend to the Hausdorff family who obtained books and magazines from the academic library, which Hausdorff was no longer allowed to enter.\nA great deal is known about the humiliations to which Hausdorff and his family especially were exposed to after Kristallnacht in 1938. There are many sources, including the letters of Bessel-Hagen.\nIn 1939, Hausdorff asked the mathematician Richard Courant, in vain, for a research fellowship to be able to emigrate into the USA. \nIn mid-1941, the Bonn Jews began to be deported to the \"Monastery for Eternal Adoration\" in Endenich, Bonn, from which the nuns had been expelled. Transports to death camps in the east occurred later. After Hausdorff, his wife, and his wife's sister, Edith Pappenheim (who was living with them), were ordered in January 1942 to move to the Endenich camp, the three died by suicide on 26 January 1942 by taking an overdose of veronal. Their final resting place is located on the cemetery Poppelsdorf in Bonn. In the time between their placement in temporary camps and his suicide, he gave his handwritten \"Nachlass\" to the Egyptologist and presbyter Hans Bonnet, who saved as much of them as possible, even despite the destruction of his house by a bomb.\nSome of his fellow Jews may have had illusions about the camp Endenich, but not Hausdorff. In the estate of Bessel-Hagen, E. Neuenschwander discovered the farewell letter that Hausdorff wrote to his lawyer Hans Wollstein, who was also Jewish. Here is the beginning and end of the letter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dear friend Wollstein!\nIf you receive these lines, we (three) have solved the problem in a different manner \u2014 in the manner of which you have constantly tried to dissuade us. The feeling of security that you have predicted for us once we would overcome the difficulties of the move, is still eluding us; on the contrary, Endenich may not even be the end!\nWhat has happened in recent months against the Jews evokes justified fear that they will not let us live to see a more bearable situation.\nAfter thanking friends and, in great composure, expressing his last wishes regarding his funeral and his will, Hausdorff writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am sorry that we cause you yet more effort beyond death, and I am convinced that you are doing what you can do (which perhaps is not very much). Forgive us our desertion! We wish you and all our friends to experience better times.\nYour truly devoted\nFelix Hausdorff\nUnfortunately, this desire was not fulfilled. Hausdorff's lawyer, Wollstein, was murdered in Auschwitz.\nHausdorff's library was sold by his son-in-law and sole heir, Arthur K\u00f6nig. The portions of Hausdorff's \"Nachlass\" which could be saved by Hans Bonnet are now in the university and State Library of Bonn. The \"Nachlass\" is catalogued.\nWork and reception.\nHausdorff as philosopher and writer (Paul Mongr\u00e9).\nHausdorff's volume of aphorisms, published in 1897, was his first work published under the pseudonym Paul Mongr\u00e9. It is entitled \"Sant' Ilario: Thoughts from the landscape of Zarathustra\". The subtitle plays first on the fact that Hausdorff had completed his book during a recovery stay on the Ligurian coast by Genoa and that in this same area, Friedrich Nietzsche wrote the first two parts of \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\"; he also alludes to his spiritual closeness to Nietzsche. In an article on Sant' Ilario in the weekly paper Die Zukunft, Hausdorff acknowledged in his debt to Nietzsche.\nHausdorff was not trying to copy or even exceed Nietzsche. \"Of Nietzsche imitation no trace\", says a contemporary review. He follows Nietzsche in an attempt to liberate individual thinking, to take the liberty of questioning outdated standards. Hausdorff maintained critical distance to the late works of Nietzsche. In his essay on the book \"The Will to Power\" compiled from notes left in the Nietzsche Archive he says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Nietzsche glows a fanatic. His morality of breeding, erected on our present biological and physiological foundations of knowledge: that could be a world historical scandal against which the Inquisition and witch trials fade into harmless aberrations.\nHis critical standard he took from Nietzsche himself,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From the kind, modest, understanding Nietzsche and from the free spirit of the cool, dogma-free, unsystematic skeptic Nietzsche ...\nIn 1898\u2014also under the pseudonym Paul Mongr\u00e9\u2014Hausdorff published an epistemological experiment titled \"Chaos in cosmic selection\". The critique of metaphysics put forward in this book had its starting point in Hausdorff's confrontation with Nietzsche's idea of eternal recurrence. Ultimately, it is about destroying \"any\" kind of metaphysics. Of the world itself, of the \"transcendent core of the world\"\u2014as Hausdorff puts it\u2014we know nothing and we can know nothing. We must assume \"the world itself\" as undetermined and undeterminable, as mere chaos. The world of our experience, our cosmos, is the result of the selections that we have made and will always instinctively make according to our capacity for understanding. Seen from that chaos, all other frameworks, other cosmos, are conceivable. That is to say, from the world of our cosmos, one cannot draw any conclusions about the transcendent world.\nIn 1904, in the magazine The New Rundschau, Hausdorff's play appeared, the one-act play \"The doctor of his honor\". It is a crude satire on the duel and on the traditional concepts of honor and nobility of the Prussian officer corps, which in the developing bourgeois society were increasingly anachronistic. \"The doctor of his honor\" was Hausdorff's most popular literary work. In 1914\u20131918 there were numerous performances in more than thirty cities. Hausdorff later wrote an epilogue to the play, but it was not performed at that time. Only in 2006 did this epilogue have its premier at the annual meeting of the German Mathematical Society in Bonn. In 2021 the first English translation of \"The doctor of his honor\" was published by The Hausdorff Center for Mathematics in Bonn.\nBesides the works mentioned above, Hausdorff also wrote numerous essays that appeared in some of the leading literary magazines of the time. He also wrote a book of poems, \"Ecstasy\" (1900). Some of his poems were set to music by Austrian composer Joseph Marx.\nTheory of ordered sets.\nHausdorff's entrance into a thorough study of ordered sets was prompted in part by Cantor's continuum problem: where should the cardinal number formula_1 be placed in the sequence formula_2? In a letter to Hilbert on 29 September 1904, he speaks of this problem, \"it has plagued me almost like monomania\". Hausdorff saw a new strategy to attack the problem in the set formula_3. Cantor had suspected formula_4, but had only been able to show that formula_5. While formula_6 is the \"number\" of possible well-orderings of a countable set, formula_7 had now emerged as the \"number\" of all possible orders of such an amount. It was natural, therefore, to study systems that are more specific than orders, but more general than well-orderings. Hausdorff did just that in his first volume of 1901, with the publication of theoretical studies of \"graded sets\". However, we know from the results of Kurt G\u00f6del and Paul Cohen that this strategy to solve the continuum problem is just as ineffectual as Cantor's strategy, which was aimed at generalizing the Cantor\u2013Bendixson principle from closed sets to general uncountable sets.\nIn 1904 Hausdorff published the recursion named after him, which states that for each non-limit ordinal formula_8 we have formula_9\nThis formula was, together with a later notion called cofinality introduced by Hausdorff, the basis for all further results for Aleph exponentiation. Hausdorff's excellent knowledge of recurrence formulas of this kind also empowered him to uncover an error in Julius K\u00f6nig's lecture at the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1904 in Heidelberg. There K\u00f6nig had argued that the continuum cannot be well-ordered, so its cardinality is not an Aleph at all, and thus caused a great stir. The fact that it was Hausdorff who clarified the mistake carries a special significance, since a false impression of the events in Heidelberg lasted for over 50 years.\nIn the years 1906\u20131909 Hausdorff did his groundbreaking and fundamental work on ordered sets. Of fundamental importance to the whole theory is the concept of cofinality, which Hausdorff introduced. If formula_10 is an ordinal, then a collection formula_11 of ordinals each less than formula_10 is cofinal in formula_10 if, for every formula_14, there is a formula_15 such that formula_16. So, in a sense, a cofinal collection in formula_10 encompasses all of formula_10. Since a collection of objects from a well-ordered set is well-ordered under the original ordering, we can naturally assign a well-order to any such formula_11. As it turns out, any collection formula_11 of ordinals less than an ordinal formula_10 has an order type no greater than formula_10. An ordinal formula_10 is then called regular if any collection of ordinals cofinal in formula_10 has, in fact, the same order type as formula_10. In other words, formula_10 is regular if every collection of smaller ordinals that encompasses formula_10 has the same size, order-theoretically, as formula_10. Hausdorff's question, whether there are regular numbers which index a limit ordinal, was the starting point for the theory of inaccessible cardinals. Hausdorff had already noticed that such numbers, if they exist, must be of \"exorbitant size\".\nThe following theorem due to Hausdorff is also of fundamental importance: for each unbounded and ordered dense set formula_29 there are two uniquely determined regular initial numbers formula_30 so that formula_29 is cofinal with formula_32 and coinitial with formula_33 (where * denotes the inverse order). This theorem provides, for example, a technique to characterize elements and gaps in ordered sets.\nIf formula_34 is a predetermined set of characters (element and gap characters), the question arises whether there are ordered sets whose character set is exactly formula_34. One can easily find a necessary condition for formula_34, but Hausdorff was also able to show that this condition is sufficient. For this one needs a rich reservoir of ordered sets, which Hausdorff was also able to create with his theory of general products and powers. In this reservoir can be found interesting structures like the Hausdorff formula_37 normal-types, in connection with which Hausdorff first formulated the generalized continuum hypothesis. Hausdorff's formula_37-sets formed the starting point for the study of the important model theory of saturated structure.\nHausdorff's general products and powers of cardinalities led him to study the concept of partially ordered set. The question of whether any ordered subset of a partially ordered set is contained in a maximal ordered subset was answered in the positive by Hausdorff using the well-ordering theorem. This is the Hausdorff maximal principle, which follows from either the well-ordering theorem or the axiom of choice, and as it turned out, is also equivalent to the axiom of choice.\nWriting in 1908, Arthur Moritz Schoenflies found in his report on set theory that the newer theory of ordered sets (i.e., that which occurred after Cantor's extensions) was almost exclusively due to Hausdorff.\nThe \"Magnum Opus\": \"Principles of set theory\".\nAccording to previous notions, set theory included not only the general set theory and the theory of sets of points, but also dimension and measure theory. Hausdorff's textbook was the first to present all of set theory in this broad sense, systematically and with full proofs. Hausdorff was aware of how easily the human mind can err while also seeking for rigor and truth, so in the preface of his work he promises:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2026 to be as economical as possible with the human privilege of error.\nThis book went far beyond its masterful portrayal of already-known concepts. It also contained a series of important original contributions by the author.\nThe first few chapters deal with the basic concepts of general set theory. In the beginning Hausdorff provides a detailed set algebra with some pioneering new concepts (differences chain, set rings and set fields, formula_39- and formula_40-systems). The introductory paragraphs on sets and their connections included, for example, the modern set-theoretic notion of functions. Chapters 3 to 5 discussed the classical theory of cardinal numbers, order types and ordinals, and in the sixth chapter \"Relations between ordered and well-ordered sets\" Hausdorff presents, among other things, the most important results of his own research on ordered sets.\nIn the chapters on \"point sets\"\u2014the topological chapters\u2014Hausdorff developed for the first time, based on the known neighborhood axioms, a systematic theory of topological spaces, where in addition he added the separation axiom later named after him. This theory emerges from a comprehensive synthesis of earlier approaches of other mathematicians and Hausdorff's own reflections on the problem of space. The concepts and theorems of classical point set theory formula_41 are\u2014as far as possible\u2014transferred to the general case, and thus become part of the newly created general or set-theoretic topology. But Hausdorff not only performed this \"translation work\", but he also developed basic construction methods of topology such as core formation (open core, self-dense core) and shell formation (closure), and he works through the fundamental importance of the concept of an open set (called \"area\" by him) and of the concept of compactness introduced by Fr\u00e9chet. He also founded and developed the theory of the connected set, particularly through the introduction of the terms \"component\" and \"quasi-component\".\nWith the first Hausdorff countability axiom, and eventually the second, the considered spaces were gradually further specialized. A large class of spaces satisfying the countable first axiom are metric spaces. They were introduced in 1906 by Fr\u00e9chet under the name \"classes (E)\". The term \"metric space\" comes from Hausdorff. In \"Principles\", he developed the theory of metric spaces and systematically enriched it through a series of new concepts: Hausdorff metric, complete, total boundedness, formula_42-connectivity, reducible sets. Fr\u00e9chet's work is not particularly famous; only through Hausdorff's \"Principles\" did metric spaces become common knowledge to mathematicians.\nThe chapter on illustrations and the final chapter of \"Principles\" on measure and integration theory are enriched by the generality of the material and the originality of presentation. Hausdorff's mention of the importance of measure theory for probability had great historical effect, despite its laconic brevity. One finds in this chapter the first correct proof of the strong law of large numbers of \u00c9mile Borel. Finally, the appendix contains the single most spectacular result of the whole book, namely Hausdorff's theorem that one cannot define a volume for all bounded subsets of formula_41 for formula_44. The proof is based on Hausdorff's paradoxical ball decomposition, whose production requires the axiom of choice.\nDuring the 20th century, it became the standard to build mathematical theories on axiomatic set theory. The creation of axiomatically founded generalized theories, such as general topology, served among other things to single out the common structural core for various specific cases or regions and then set up an abstract theory, which contained all these parts as special cases. This brought a great success in the form of simplification and harmonization, and ultimately brought with itself an economy of thought. Hausdorff himself highlighted this aspect in the \"Principles\". In the topological chapter, the basic concepts are methodologically a pioneering effort, and they paved the way for the development of modern mathematics.\n\"Principles of set theory\" appeared in April 1914, on the eve of the First World War, which dramatically affected scientific life in Europe. Under these circumstances, the effects Hausdorff's book on mathematical thought would not be seen for five to six years after its appearance. After the war, a new generation of young researchers set forth to expand on the abundant suggestions that were included in this work. Undoubtedly, topology was the primary focus of attention. The journal \"Fundamenta Mathematicae\", founded in Poland in 1920, played a special role in the reception of Hausdorff's ideas. It was one of the first mathematical journals with special emphasis on set theory, topology, the theory of real functions, measure and integration theory, functional analysis, logic, and foundations of mathematics. Across this spectrum, a special focus was placed on topology. Hausdorff's \"Principles\" was cited in the very first volume of Fundamenta Mathematicae, and through citation counting its influence continued at a remarkable rate. Of the 558 works (Hausdorff's own three works not included), which appeared in the first twenty volumes of Fundamenta Mathematicae from 1920 to 1933, 88 of them cite \"Principles\". One must also take into account the fact that, as Hausdorff's ideas became increasingly commonplace, so too were they used in a number of works that did not cite them explicitly.\nThe Russian topological school, founded by Paul Alexandroff and Paul Urysohn, was based heavily on Hausdorff's \"Principles\". This is shown by the surviving correspondence in Hausdorff's Nachlass with Urysohn, and especially Alexandroff and Urysohn's \"M\u00e9moire sur les multiplicit\u00e9s Cantoriennes\", a work the size of a book, in which Urysohn developed dimension theory and \"Principles\" is cited no fewer than 60 times.\nAfter the Second World War there was a strong demand for Hausdorff's book, and there were three reprints at Chelsea from 1949, 1965 and 1978.\nDescriptive set theory, measure theory and analysis.\nIn 1916, Alexandroff and Hausdorff independently solved the continuum problem for Borel sets: Every Borel set in a complete separable metric space is either countable or has the cardinality of the continuum. This result generalizes the Cantor\u2013Bendixson theorem that such a statement holds for the closed sets of formula_41. For linear formula_46 sets William Henry Young had proved the result in 1903, for formula_47 sets Hausdorff obtained a corresponding result in 1914 in \"Principles\". The theorem of Alexandroff and Hausdorff was a strong impetus for further development of descriptive set theory.\nAmong the publications of Hausdorff in his time at Greifswald the work \"Dimension and outer measure\" from 1919 is particularly outstanding. In this work, the concepts were introduced which are now known as Hausdorff measure and the Hausdorff dimension. It has remained highly topical and in later years has been one of the most cited mathematical works from the decade of 1910 to 1920.\nThe concept of Hausdorff dimension is useful for the characterization and comparison of \"highly rugged quantities\". The concepts of \"Dimension and outer measure\" have experienced applications and further developments in many areas such as in the theory of dynamical systems, geometric measure theory, the theory of self-similar sets and fractals, the theory of stochastic processes, harmonic analysis, potential theory, and number theory.\nSignificant analytical work of Hausdorff occurred in his second time at Bonn. In \"Summation methods and moment sequences I\" in 1921, he developed a whole class of summation methods for divergent series, which today are called Hausdorff methods. In Hardy's classic \"Divergent Series\", an entire chapter is devoted to the Hausdorff method. The classical methods of H\u00f6lder and Ces\u00e0ro proved to be special cases of the Hausdorff method. Every Hausdorff method is given by a moment sequence; in this context Hausdorff gave an elegant solution of the moment problem for a finite interval, bypassing the theory of continued fractions. In his paper \"Moment problems for a finite interval\" of 1923 he treated more special moment problems, such as those with certain restrictions for generating density formula_48, for instance formula_49. Criteria for solvability and decidability of moment problems occupied Hausdorff for many years, as hundreds of pages of handwritten notes in his Nachlass attest.\nA significant contribution to the emerging field of functional analysis in the 1920s was Hausdorff's extension of the Riesz-Fischer theorem to formula_50 spaces in his 1923 work \"An extension of Parseval's theorem on Fourier series\". He proved the inequalities now named after him and W.H. Young. The Hausdorff\u2013Young inequalities became the starting point of major new developments.\nHausdorff's book \"Set Theory\" appeared in 1927. This was declared as a second Edition of \"Principles\", but it was actually a completely new book. Since the scale was significantly reduced due to its appearance in Goschen's teaching library, large parts of the theory of ordered sets and measures and integration theory were removed. In its preface, Hausdorff writes, \"Perhaps even more than these deletions the reader will regret the most that, to further save space in point set theory, I have abandoned the topological point of view through which the first edition has apparently acquired many friends, and focused on the simpler theory of metric spaces\".\nIn fact, this was an explicit regret of some reviewers of the work. As a kind of compensation Hausdorff showed for the first time the then-current state of descriptive set theory. This fact assured the book almost as intense a reception as \"Principles\", especially in Fundamenta Mathematicae. As a textbook it was very popular. In 1935 there was an expanded edition published, and this was reprinted by Dover in 1944. An English translation appeared in 1957 with reprints in 1962 and 1967.\nThere was also a Russian edition (1937), although it was only partially a faithful translation, and partly a reworking by Alexandroff and Kolmogorov. In this translation the topological point of view again moved to the forefront. In 1928 a review of \"Set Theory\" was written by Hans Hahn, who perhaps had the danger of German antisemitism in his mind as he closed his discussion with the following sentence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An exemplary depiction in every respect of a difficult and thorny area, a work on par with those which have carried the fame of German science throughout the world, and such that all German mathematicians may be proud of.\nHis last works.\nIn 1938, Hausdorff's last work \"Extension of a continuous map\" showed that a continuous function from a closed subset formula_51 of a metric space formula_52 can be extended to all of formula_52 (although the image may need to be extended). As a special case, every homeomorphism from formula_51 can be extended to a homeomorphism from formula_52. This work continued research from earlier years. In 1919, in \"About semi-continuous functions and their generalization\", Hausdorff had, among other things, given another proof of the Tietze extension theorem. In 1930, in \"Extending a homeomorphism\", he showed the following: Let formula_52 be a metric space, formula_57 a closed subset. If formula_51 is given a new metric without changing the topology, this metric can be extended to the entire space without changing the topology. The work \"Graded spaces\" appeared in 1935, where Hausdorff discussed spaces which fulfilled the Kuratowski closure axioms up to the axiom of idempotence. These spaces are often also called closure spaces, and Hausdorff used them to study relationships between the Fr\u00e9chet limit spaces and topological spaces.\nHausdorff as name-giver.\nThe name Hausdorff is found throughout mathematics. Among others, these concepts were named after him:\nIn the universities of Bonn and Greifswald, these things were named in his honor:\nBesides these, in Bonn there is the Hausdorffstra\u00dfe (Hausdorff Street), where he first lived. (Haus-Nr.\u00a061). In Greifswald there is a Felix-Hausdorff\u2013Stra\u00dfe, where the Institutes for Biochemistry and Physics are located, among others. Since 2011, there is a \"Hausdorffweg\" (Hausdorff-Way) in the middle of Leipziger Ortsteil Gohlis.\nThe Asteroid 24947 Hausdorff was named after him.\nWritings.\nAs Paul Mongr\u00e9.\nOnly a selection of the essays that appeared in text are shown here.\nAs Felix Hausdorff.\n\"Hausdorff on Ordered Sets\". Trans. and Ed.: Jacob M. Plotkin, American Mathematical Society 2005.\nCollected works.\nThe \"Hausdorff-Edition\", edited by E. Brieskorn\u00a0(\u2020), F. Hirzebruch\u00a0(\u2020), W. Purkert (all Bonn), R. Remmert\u00a0(\u2020) (M\u00fcnster) and E. Scholz (Wuppertal) with the collaboration of over twenty mathematicians, historians, philosophers and scholars, is an ongoing project of the North Rhine-Westphalian Academy of Sciences, Humanities and the Arts to present the works of Hausdorff, with commentary and much additional material. The volumes have been published by Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg. Nine volumes have been published with volume I being split up into volume IA and volume IB. See the website of the Hausdorff Project https:// for further information. The volumes are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10990", "revid": "1311821942", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10990", "title": "Fimbulwinter", "text": "Norse mythological event preceding Ragnar\u00f6k\nFimbulwinter (, lit.\u2009'mighty winter') is the immediate prelude to the events of Ragnar\u00f6k in Norse mythology.\nEtymology.\n comes from Old Norse, meaning \"awful, mighty winter\". The prefix \"fimbul\", albeit with a largely unknown etymology, means \"mighty, giant\" etc., so the literal interpretation is \"mighty winter\".\nOverview.\nFimbulwinter is the harsh winter that precedes the end of the world. Fimbulwinter is three successive winters, when snow comes in from all directions, without any intervening summer. Innumerable wars follow.\nThe event is described primarily in the \"Poetic Edda\". In the poem , Odin poses the question to Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir as to who of mankind will survive the Fimbulwinter. Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir responds that L\u00edf and L\u00edf\u00ferasir will survive and that they will live in the forest of Hoddm\u00edmis holt.\nThe mythology might be related to the volcanic winter of 536, which resulted in a notable drop in temperature across northern Europe. There have also been several popular ideas about whether the particular piece of mythology has a connection to the climate change that occurred in the Nordic countries at the end of the Nordic Bronze Age from about 650 BC.\nIn Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and other Nordic countries, the term still refers to an unusually cold and harsh winter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10991", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10991", "title": "February 10", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearFebruary 10 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10992", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10992", "title": "Frankfurt", "text": "Largest city in Hesse, Germany\nFrankfurt am Main, commonly referred to simply as Frankfurt, is the most populous city in the German state of Hesse. Its 778,589 inhabitants as of 2025 make it the fifth-most populous city in Germany. Located in the foreland of the Taunus on its namesake Main, the city forms a continuous conurbation with Offenbach am Main; its urban area has a population of over 2.7 million. Frankfurt is the heart of the larger Rhine-Main metropolitan region, which has a population of more than 5.8 million and is Germany's second-largest metropolitan region after the Rhine-Ruhr region. Home to the European Central Bank, the city serves as one of the four institutional seats of the European Union (alongside Brussels, Luxembourg and Strasbourg). Frankfurt is classified by the GaWC as an Alpha-rated world city.\nFrankfurt was a city state, the Free City of Frankfurt, for nearly five centuries, and was one of the most important cities of the Holy Roman Empire, as a site of Imperial coronations; it lost its sovereignty upon the collapse of the empire in 1806, regained it in 1815 and then lost it again in 1866, when it was annexed (though neutral) by the Kingdom of Prussia. It has been part of the state of Hesse since 1945. Frankfurt is culturally, ethnically and religiously diverse, with half of its population, and a majority of its young people, having a migrant background. A quarter of the population consists of foreign nationals, including many expatriates. In 2015, Frankfurt was home to 1,909 ultra high-net-worth individuals, the sixth-highest number of any city.\nFrankfurt is a global hub for commerce, culture, education, tourism and transportation, and is the site of many global and European corporate headquarters. Due to its central location in the former West Germany, Frankfurt Airport became the busiest in Germany, one of the busiest in the world, the airport with the most direct routes in the world, and the primary hub for Lufthansa, the national airline of Germany and Europe's largest airline. Frankfurt Central Station is Germany's second-busiest railway station after Hamburg Hbf, operated by , the world's largest railway company, whose Frankfurter division DB InfraGO manages the largest railway network in Europe. Frankfurter Kreuz is the most-heavily used interchange in the EU. Frankfurt is one of the major financial and business centers of the European continent, with the headquarters of the European Central Bank, , 2 of the top 5 central banks worldwide, Frankfurt Stock Exchange, , DZ Bank, KfW, Commerzbank, DekaBank, Helaba, several cloud and fintech startups, and other institutes. Automotive, technology and research, services, consulting, media and creative industries complement the economic base. Frankfurt's DE-CIX is the world's largest internet exchange point. Messe Frankfurt is one of the world's largest trade fairs. Major fairs include the Music Fair and the Frankfurt Book Fair, the world's largest book fair. The city also has 93 consulates, among which the largest is the US Consulate General.\nFrankfurt is home to influential educational institutions, including the Goethe University with the Universit\u00e4tsklinikum Frankfurt (Hesse's largest hospital), the FUAS, the FUMPA, and graduate schools like the FSFM. The city is one seat of two seats of the German National Library (alongside Leipzig), the largest library in the German-speaking countries and one of the largest in the world. Its renowned cultural venues include the concert hall Alte Oper, continental Europe's largest English theater and many museums, including the St\u00e4del, Liebieghaus, German Film Museum, Senckenberg Natural Museum, Goethe House and Schirn art venue. Frankfurt's skyline is shaped by some of Europe's tallest skyscrapers, which has led to the term \"Mainhattan\". The city has many notable green areas and parks, including the Wallanlagen, Volkspark Niddatal, Gr\u00fcneburgpark, the City Forest, two major botanical gardens (the Palmengarten and the Botanical Garden Frankfurt) and the Frankfurt Zoological Garden. Frankfurt is the seat of the German Football Association, is home to the first division association football club Eintracht Frankfurt, the L\u00f6wen Frankfurt ice hockey team, and the basketball club Frankfurt Skyliners, and is the venue of the Frankfurt Marathon and the Ironman Germany.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDistinctions.\nFrankfurt is the largest financial hub in continental Europe. It is home to the European Central Bank, , Frankfurt Stock Exchange and several large commercial banks. Frankfurt has many high-rise buildings that form its renowned Frankfurt skyline. In fact, it is one of the few cities in the European Union (EU) to have such a skyline. The Frankfurt Stock Exchange is one of the world's largest stock exchanges by market capitalization and accounts for more than 90 percent of the turnover in the German market.\nIn 2010, 63 national and 152 international banks had their registered offices in Frankfurt, including Germany's major banks, notably , DZ Bank, KfW, Deka Bank and Commerzbank, as well as 41 representative offices of international banks. Frankfurt has been nicknamed Mainhattan and Bankfurt. The city is also noted for its unique timber-framed old town. The R\u00f6mer area has been most recently in the Dom-R\u00f6mer Project and hosts the Frankfurt Christmas Market. The Saalgasse complements the timbered romanticism with postmodern houses by 12 different architectural firms.\nFrankfurt is considered a global city as listed by the GaWC group's 2012 inventory. Among global cities it was ranked tenth by the Global Power City Index 2011 and 11th by the Global City Competitiveness Index 2012. Among financial hubs, the city was ranked eighth by the International Financial Centers Development Index 2013 and ninth in the 2013 Global Financial Centres Index.\nIts central location in Germany and Europe makes Frankfurt a major air, rail, and road transport hub. Frankfurt Airport is one of the world's busiest international airports by passenger traffic and the main hub for Germany's flag carrier Lufthansa. Frankfurt Central Station is one of the largest rail stations in Europe and the busiest junction operated by , the German national railway company, with 342 trains a day to domestic and European destinations. Frankfurter Kreuz, also known as the Autobahn interchange and located close to the airport, is the most-heavily used interchange in the EU, used by 320,000 cars daily. In 2011 human-resource-consulting firm Mercer ranked Frankfurt as seventh in its annual 'Quality of Living' survey of cities around the world. According to \"The Economist\" cost-of-living survey, Frankfurt is Germany's most expensive city and the world's tenth most expensive.\nEtymology.\n (in Old High German) or (in Latin) were the first names mentioned in written records from 794. It transformed to \"Frankenfort\" during the Middle Ages and then to \"Franckfort\" and \"Franckfurth\" in the modern era. The name is derived from the \"Franconofurd\" of the Germanic tribe of the Franks; \"Furt\" (cf. English \"ford\") where the river was shallow enough to be crossed on foot.\nThietmar of Merseburg in the 11th century reported a founding legend in which Charlemagne and his army of Franks discovered the ford at Frankfurt when a doe crossed over it, showing them the way; in honor of this the city was named \"ford of the Franks\".\nBy the 19th century, the name \"Frankfurt\" had been established as the official spelling. The older English spelling of \"Frankfort\" is now rarely seen in reference to Frankfurt am Main, although more than a dozen other towns and cities, mainly in the United States, use this spelling, including Frankfort, Kentucky, Frankfort, New York, and Frankfort, Illinois. \"The New York Times\" first used the Frankfurt spelling for Frankfurt am Main on 24 October 1953 and last used the Frankfort spelling on 10 June 1954.\nThe suffix \"am Main\" has been used regularly since the 14th century. In English, the city's full name of \"Frankfurt am Main\" means \"Frankfurt on the Main\" (pronounced like English \"mine\" or German ). Frankfurt is located on an ancient ford (German: \"\") on the river Main. As a part of early Franconia, the inhabitants were the early Franks, thus the city's name reveals its legacy as \"the ford of the Franks on the Main\".\nAmong English speakers, the city is commonly known simply as Frankfurt, but Germans occasionally call it by its full name to distinguish it from the other (significantly smaller) German city of Frankfurt an der Oder in the \"Land\" of Brandenburg on the Polish border.\nThe city district Bonames has a name probably dating back to Roman times, thought to be derived from \"bona me(n)sa\" (good table).\nThe common abbreviations for the city, primarily used in railway services and on road signs, are \"Frankfurt (Main)\", \"Frankfurt (M)\", \"Frankfurt a. M.\", \"Frankfurt/Main\" or \"Frankfurt/M\". The common abbreviation for the name of the city is \"FFM\". Also in use is \"FRA\", the IATA code for Frankfurt Airport.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTimeline of Frankfurt am Main\n \u00a0Francia, 794\u2013843\n\u00a0East Francia, 843\u2013962\n Holy Roman Empire, 962\u20131806\n Free City of Frankfurt, 1372\u20131806\n Grand Duchy of Frankfurt, 1806\u20131813 \n Free City of Frankfurt, 1813\u20131866\n Kingdom of Prussia, 1866\u20131918\n German Empire, 1871\u20131918 \n Weimar Republic, 1918\u20131933 \n German Reich, 1933\u20131945\n American occupation zone, 1945\u20131949\n West Germany, 1949\u20131990 \n, 1990\u2013\"present\"\nEarly history and Holy Roman Empire.\nAt the western borders of Frankfurt lies the Kapellenberg as part of the Taunus with one of the first Stone Age cities in Europe. The Celts had different settlements in the Taunus mountains north of Frankfurt, the biggest one the Heidetrank Oppidum. The first traces of Roman settlements established in the area of the river Nidda date to the reign of Emperor Vespasian in the years 69 to 79 AD. Nida (modern Heddernheim, Praunheim) was a Roman civitas capital (\"Civitas Taunensium\").\nAlemanni and Franks lived there, and by 794, Charlemagne presided over an imperial assembly and church synod, at which \"Franconofurd\" (alternative spellings end with -furt and -vurd) was first mentioned. It was one of the two capitals of Charlemagne's grandson Louis the German, together with Regensburg. Louis founded the collegiate church, rededicated in 1239 to Bartholomew the Apostle and now Frankfurt Cathedral.\nFrankfurt was one of the most important cities in the Holy Roman Empire. From 855, the German kings were elected and crowned in Aachen. From 1562, the kings and emperors were crowned and elected in Frankfurt, initiated for Maximilian II. This tradition ended in 1792, when Francis II was elected. His coronation was deliberately held on Bastille Day, 14 July, the anniversary of the storming of the Bastille. The elections and coronations took place in St. Bartholom\u00e4us Cathedral, known as the (Emperor's Cathedral), or its predecessors.\nThe ('Frankfurt Trade Fair') was first mentioned in 1150. In 1240, Emperor Frederick II granted an imperial privilege to its visitors, meaning they would be protected by the empire. The fair became particularly important when similar fairs in French Beaucaire lost attraction around 1380. Book trade fairs began in 1478.\nIn 1372, Frankfurt became a (Imperial Free City), i.e., directly subordinate to the Holy Roman Emperor and not to a regional ruler or a local nobleman.\nIn 1585, Frankfurt traders established a system of exchange rates for the various currencies that were circulating to prevent cheating and extortion. Therein lay the early roots for the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.\nFrankfurt managed to remain neutral during the Thirty Years' War, but suffered from the bubonic plague that refugees brought to the city. After the war, Frankfurt regained its wealth. In the late 1770s the theater principal Abel Seyler was based in Frankfurt, and established the city's theatrical life.\nImpact of French revolution and the Napoleonic Wars.\nFollowing the French Revolution, Frankfurt was occupied or bombarded several times by French troops. It remained a Free city until the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire in 1805/6. In 1806, it became part of the principality of Aschaffenburg under the (Prince-Primate), Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg. This meant that Frankfurt was incorporated into the Confederation of the Rhine. In 1810, Dalberg adopted the title of a Grand Duke of Frankfurt. Napoleon intended to make his adopted son Eug\u00e8ne de Beauharnais, already (\"prince of Venice\", a newly established primogeniture in Italy), Grand Duke of Frankfurt after Dalberg's death (since the latter as a Catholic bishop had no legitimate heirs). The Grand Duchy remained a short episode lasting from 1810 to 1813 when the military tide turned in favor of the Anglo-Prussian-led allies that overturned the Napoleonic order. Dalberg abdicated in favor of Eug\u00e8ne de Beauharnais, which of course was only a symbolic action, as the latter effectively never ruled after the ruin of the French armies and Frankfurt's takeover by the allies.\nFrankfurt as a fully sovereign state.\nAfter Napoleon's final defeat and abdication, the Congress of Vienna (1814\u20131815) dissolved the grand-duchy and Frankfurt became a fully sovereign city-state with a republican form of government. Frankfurt entered the newly founded German Confederation (till 1866) as a free city, becoming the seat of its , the confederal parliament where the nominally presiding Habsburg Emperor of Austria was represented by an Austrian \"presidential envoy\".\nAfter the ill-fated revolution of 1848, Frankfurt was the seat of the first democratically elected German parliament, the Frankfurt Parliament, which met in the (St. Paul's Church) and was opened on 18 May 1848. In the year of its existence, the assembly developed a common constitution for a unified Germany, with the Prussian king as its monarch. The institution failed in 1849 when the Prussian king, Frederick William IV, declared that he would not accept \"a crown from the gutter\".\nFrankfurt after the loss of sovereignty.\nFrankfurt lost its independence following the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, when Prussia annexed several smaller states, including the Free City of Frankfurt. The city was subsequently incorporated into the Prussian province of Hesse-Nassau. The occupation and annexation were widely regarded in Frankfurt as a grave injustice, yet the city retained its distinctly Western European, urban, and cosmopolitan character. The formerly independent towns of Bornheim and Bockenheim were incorporated in 1890.\nIn 1914, the citizens founded the University of Frankfurt, later named Goethe University Frankfurt. This marked the only civic foundation of a university in Germany; today it is one of Germany's largest.\nFrom 6 April to 17 May 1920, following military intervention to put down the Ruhr uprising, Frankfurt was occupied by French troops. The French claimed that Articles 42 to 44 of the peace treaty of Versailles concerning the demilitarization of the Rhineland had been broken. In 1924, Ludwig Landmann became the first Jewish mayor of the city, and led a significant expansion during the following years. During the Nazi era, the synagogues of the city were destroyed and the vast majority of the Jewish population fled or was killed.\nDuring World War II, Frankfurt was the location of a Nazi prison for underage girls with several forced labour camps, a camp for Sinti and Romani people (see \"Romani Holocaust\"), the Dulag Luft West transit camp for Allied prisoners of war, and a subcamp of the Natzweiler-Struthof concentration camp.\nFrankfurt was severely bombed in World War II (1939\u20131945). About 5,500 residents were killed during the raids, and the once-famous medieval city center, by that time one of the largest in Germany, was almost completely destroyed. It became a ground battlefield on 26 March 1945, when the Allied advance into Germany was forced to take the city in contested urban combat that included a river assault. The 5th Infantry Division and the 6th Armored Division of the United States Army captured Frankfurt after several days of intense fighting, and it was declared largely secure on 29 March 1945. In spite of the wartime destruction, over 40% of Frankfurt's buildings still date from before the Second World War.\nAfter the end of the war, Frankfurt became a part of the newly founded state of Hesse, consisting of the old Hesse-(Darmstadt) and the Prussian Hesse provinces. The city was part of the American Zone of Occupation of Germany. The Military Governor for the United States Zone (1945\u20131949) and the United States High Commissioner for Germany (HICOG) (1949\u20131952) had their headquarters in the IG Farben Building, intentionally left undamaged by the Allies' wartime bombardment.\nFrankfurt was the original choice for the provisional capital city of the newly founded state of West Germany in 1949. The city constructed a parliament building that was never used for its intended purpose (it housed the radio studios of Hessischer Rundfunk). In the end, Konrad Adenauer, the first postwar Chancellor, preferred the town of Bonn, for the most part because it was close to his hometown, but also because many other prominent politicians opposed the choice of Frankfurt out of concern that Frankfurt would be accepted as the permanent capital, thereby weakening the West German population's support for a reunification with East Germany and the eventual return of the capital to Berlin.\nPostwar reconstruction took place in a sometimes simple modern style, thus changing Frankfurt's architectural face. A few landmark buildings were reconstructed historically, albeit in a simplified manner (e.g., R\u00f6mer, St. Paul's Church, and Goethe House). The collection of historically significant Cairo Genizah documents of the Municipal Library was destroyed by the bombing. According to Arabist and Genizah scholar S.D. Goitein, \"not even handlists indicating its contents have survived.\"\nThe end of the war marked Frankfurt's comeback as Germany's leading financial hub, mainly because Berlin, now a city divided into four sectors, could no longer rival it. In 1948, the Allies founded the Bank deutscher L\u00e4nder, the forerunner of . Following this decision, more financial institutions were re-established, e.g. and Dresdner Bank. In the 1950s, Frankfurt Stock Exchange regained its position as the country's leading stock exchange.\nFrankfurt also reemerged as Germany's transportation hub and Frankfurt Airport became Europe's second-busiest airport behind London Heathrow Airport in 1961.\nDuring the 1970s, the city created one of Europe's most efficient underground transportation systems. That system includes a suburban rail system (S-Bahn) linking outlying communities with the city center, and a deep underground light rail system with smaller coaches (U-Bahn) also capable of travelling above ground on rails.\nIn 1998, the European Central Bank was founded in Frankfurt, followed by the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and European Systemic Risk Board in 2011.\nGeography.\nFrankfurt is the largest city in the state of Hesse in the western part of Germany.\nSite.\nFrankfurt is located on both sides of the river Main, south-east of the Taunus mountain range. The southern part of the city contains the Frankfurt City Forest, Germany's largest city forest. The city area is and extends over east to west and north to south. Its downtown is north of the river Main in Altstadt district (the historical center) and the surrounding Innenstadt district. The geographical center is in Bockenheim district near Frankfurt West station.\nFrankfurt at the heart of the densely populated Frankfurt Rhine-Main Metropolitan Region with a population of 5.5\u00a0million. Other important cities in the region are Wiesbaden (capital of Hesse), Mainz (capital of Rhineland-Palatinate), Darmstadt, Offenbach am Main, Hanau, Aschaffenburg, Bad Homburg vor der H\u00f6he, R\u00fcsselsheim, Wetzlar and Marburg.\nDistricts.\nThe city is divided into 46 city districts (\"Stadtteile\"), which are in turn divided into 121 city boroughs (\"Stadtbezirke\") and 448 electoral districts (\"Wahlbezirke\"). The 46 city districts combine into 16 area districts (\"Ortsbezirke\"), which each have a district committee and chairperson.\nThe largest city district by population and area is Sachsenhausen, while the smallest is Altstadt, Frankfurt's historical center. Three larger city districts (Sachsenhausen, Westend and Nordend) are divided for administrative purposes into a northern (\"-Nord\") and a southern (\"-S\u00fcd\") part, respectively a western (\"-West\") and an eastern (\"-Ost\") part, but are generally considered as one city district (which is why often only 43 city districts are mentioned, even on the city's official website).\nSome larger housing areas are often falsely called city districts, even by locals, like Nordweststadt (part of Niederursel, Heddernheim and Praunheim), Goldstein (part of Schwanheim), Riedberg (part of Kalbach-Riedberg) and Europaviertel (part of Gallus). The Bankenviertel (\"banking district\"), Frankfurt's financial district, is also not an administrative city district (it covers parts of the western Innenstadt district, the southern Westend district and the eastern Bahnhofsviertel district).\nMany city districts are incorporated suburbs (\"Vororte\") or were previously independent cities, such as H\u00f6chst. Some like Nordend and Westend arose during the rapid growth of the city in the Gr\u00fcnderzeit following the Unification of Germany, while others were formed from territory which previously belonged to other city district(s), such as Dornbusch and Riederwald.\nHistory of incorporations.\nUntil the year 1877 the city's territory consisted of the present-day inner-city districts of Altstadt, Innenstadt, Bahnhofsviertel, Gutleutviertel, Gallus, Westend, Nordend, Ostend and Sachsenhausen.\nBornheim was part of an administrative district called \"Landkreis Frankfurt\", before becoming part of the city on 1 January 1877, followed by Bockenheim on 1 April 1895. Seckbach, Niederrad and Oberrad followed on 1 July 1900. The \"Landkreis Frankfurt\" was finally dispersed on 1 April 1910, and therefore Berkersheim, Bonames, Eckenheim, Eschersheim, Ginnheim, Hausen, Heddernheim, Niederursel, Praunheim, Preungesheim and R\u00f6delheim joined the city. In the same year a new city district, Riederwald, was created on territory that had formerly belonged to Seckbach and Ostend.\nOn 1 April 1928 the City of H\u00f6chst became part of Frankfurt, as well as its city districts Sindlingen, Unterliederbach and Zeilsheim. Simultaneously the \"Landkreis H\u00f6chst\" was dispersed with its member cities either joining Frankfurt (Fechenheim, Griesheim, Nied, Schwanheim, Sossenheim) or joining the newly established \"Landkreis\" of Main-Taunus-Kreis.\nDornbusch became a city district in 1946. It was created on territory that had formerly belonged to Eckenheim and Ginnheim.\nOn 1 August 1972, Hesse's smaller suburbs of Harheim, Kalbach, Nieder-Erlenbach, and Nieder-Eschbach became districts while other neighboring suburbs chose to join the Main-Taunus-Kreis, the Landkreis Offenbach, the Kreis Gro\u00df-Gerau, the Hochtaunuskreis, the Main-Kinzig-Kreis or the Wetteraukreis.\nBergen-Enkheim was the last suburb to become part of Frankfurt on 1 January 1977.\nFlughafen became an official city district in 1979. It covers the area of Frankfurt Airport that had belonged to Sachsenhausen and the neighboring city of M\u00f6rfelden-Walldorf.\nFrankfurt's youngest city district is Frankfurter Berg. It was part of Bonames until 1996.\nKalbach was officially renamed Kalbach-Riedberg in 2006 because of the large residential housing development in the area known as Riedberg.\nNeighboring districts and cities.\nTo the west Frankfurt borders the administrative district (\"Landkreis\") of Main-Taunus-Kreis with towns such as Hattersheim am Main, Kriftel, Hofheim am Taunus, Kelkheim, Liederbach am Taunus, Sulzbach, Schwalbach am Taunus and Eschborn; to the northwest the Hochtaunuskreis with Steinbach, Oberursel (Taunus) and Bad Homburg vor der H\u00f6he; to the north the Wetteraukreis with Karben and Bad Vilbel; to the northeast the Main-Kinzig-Kreis with Niederdorfelden and Maintal; to the southeast the city of Offenbach am Main; to the south the Kreis Offenbach with Neu-Isenburg and to the southwest the Kreis Gro\u00df-Gerau with M\u00f6rfelden-Walldorf, R\u00fcsselsheim and Kelsterbach.\nTogether with these towns (and some larger nearby towns, e.g., Hanau, Rodgau, Dreieich, Langen) Frankfurt forms a contiguous built-up urban area called \"Stadtregion Frankfurt\" which is not an official administrative district. The urban area had an estimated population of 2.3\u00a0million in 2010, and is the 13th-largest urban area in the EU.\nClimate.\nFrankfurt has a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\", Trewartha: \"Dobk\"). Its climate features cool winters with frequent rain showers and overcast skies, and warm summers. The average annual temperature is , with monthly mean temperatures ranging from in January to in July. The city is one of the warmest in Germany in winter.\nThe growing season is longer when compared to the rest of Germany, thus resulting in an early arrival of springtime in the region, with trees typically leafing out already toward the end of March.\nWinters in Frankfurt are generally mild or at least not freezing with a small possibility of snow, especially in January and February but dark and often overcast. Frankfurt is, on average, covered with snow only for around 10 to 20 days per year. The temperature falls below 0\u00a0\u00b0C on about 64 days and the daily maximum stays below freezing for about 10 days on average per year.\nBecause of the mild climate in the region, there are some well-known wine regions in the vicinity such as Rhenish Hesse, Rheingau, Franconia (wine region) and Bergstra\u00dfe (route). There is also a microclimate on the northern bank of the river Main which allows palms, fig trees, lemon trees and southern European plants to grow in that area. The area is called the \"Nizza\" (the German word for the southern French town Nice) and is one of the biggest parks with Mediterranean vegetation north of the Alps.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWith a population of 763,380 (2019) within its administrative boundaries and of 2,300,000 in the actual urban area, Frankfurt is the fifth-largest city in Germany, after Berlin, Hamburg, Munich and Cologne. Central Frankfurt has been a \"Gro\u00dfstadt\" (a city with at least 100,000 residents by definition) since 1875. With 414,576 residents in 1910, it was the ninth largest city in Germany and the number of inhabitants grew to 553,464 before World War II. After the war, at the end of the year 1945, the number had dropped to 358,000. In the following years, the population grew again and reached an all-time-high of 691,257 in 1963. It dropped again to 592,411 in 1986 but has increased since then. According to the demographic forecasts for central Frankfurt, the city will have a population up to 813,000 within its administrative boundaries in 2035 and more than 2.5 million inhabitants in its urban area.\nAs of 2015, Frankfurt had 1909 ultra high-net-worth individuals, the sixth-highest number of any city in the world.\nDuring the 1970s, the state government of Hesse wanted to expand the city's administrative boundaries to include the entire urban area. This would have made Frankfurt officially the second-largest city in Germany after Berlin with up to 3 million inhabitants. However, because local authorities did not agree, the administrative territory is still much smaller than its actual urban area.\nMoroccan community.\nFrankfurt has the largest Moroccan community in Germany, numbering about 8,000 people, and the Rhine-Main area has about 20,000. Many Moroccans came as guest workers in the 1970s.\nImmigration and foreign nationals.\nAccording to data from the city register of residents, 51.2% of the population had a \"migration background\" as of 2015, which means that a person or at least one of their parents was born with foreign citizenship. For the first time, a majority of the city residents had an at least part non-German background. Moreover, three of four children in the city under the age of six had full or partial immigrant backgrounds, and 27.7% of residents had a foreign citizenship.\nAccording to statistics, 46.7% of immigrants in Frankfurt come from other countries in the EU; 24.5% come from European countries that are not part of the EU; 15.7% come from Asia (including Western Asia and South Asia); 7.3% come from Africa; 3.4% come from North America (including the Caribbean and Central America); 0.2% come from Australia and New Zealand; 2.3% come from South America; and 1.1% come from Pacific island nations. Because of this the city is often considered to be a multicultural city, and has been compared to New York City and London.\nReligion.\nFrankfurt is historically a Protestant-dominated city. However, during the 19th century, an increasing number of Catholics moved to Frankfurt. As of 2013[ [update]], the largest Christian denominations were Catholicism (22.7% of the population) and Protestantism, especially Lutheranism (19.4%).\nThe Jewish community has a history dating back to medieval times and has always ranked among the largest in Germany. Over 7,200 inhabitants are affiliated with the Jewish community, making it the third largest in Germany after Berlin and Munich. Frankfurt has four active synagogues.\nFrankfurt has a Muslim community estimated at 12% in 2006. \nAccording to calculations based on census data for 21 countries of origin, the number of Muslim migrants in Frankfurt amounted to about 84,000 in 2011, making up 12.6% of the population. The most prevalent countries of origin were Turkey and Morocco. The Ahmadiyya Noor Mosque, constructed in 1959, is the city's largest mosque and the third largest in Germany. In 2020, the number of Muslims in Frankfurt's total population was estimated at 18%.\nGovernment and politics.\nMayor.\nThe current mayor is Mike Josef of the Social Democratic Party, who took the office on 11 May 2023.\nThe most recent mayoral election was held on 5 March 2023, with a runoff held on 26 March, and the results were as follows:\nCity council.\nThe Frankfurt am Main city council (\"Stadtverordnetenversammlung\") governs the city alongside the mayor. It is located in the city's medieval town hall, R\u00f6mer, which is also used for representative and official purposes. The most recent city council election was held on 14 March 2021, and the results were as follows:\nLandtag election.\nFor elections to the Hesse State Parliament, Frankfurt am Main is split up into six constituencies. In total 15 delegates represent the city in the Landtag in Wiesbaden. The last election took place in October 2018. Six members of parliament were directly elected in their respective constituencies: Uwe Serke (CDU, Frankfurt am Main I), Miriam Dahlke (Greens, Frankfurt am Main II), Ralf-Norbert Bartel (CDU, Frankfurt am Main III), Michael Boddenberg (CDU, Frankfurt am Main IV), Markus Bocklet (Greens, Frankfurt am Main V) and Boris Rhein (CDU, Frankfurt am Main VI).\nDelegates from Frankfurt often serve high-ranking positions in Hessian politics, e.g. Michael Boddenberg is Hessian Minister of Finance and Boris Rhein was elected President of the Landtag of Hesse in 2019.\nGerman federal election.\nFor federal elections which are held every four years, Frankfurt is split up into two constituencies. In the German federal election 2017, Matthias Zimmer (CDU) and Bettina Wiesmann were elected to the Bundestag by directe mandate in Frankfurt am Main I and Frankfurt am Main II respectively. Nicola Beer (FDP), Achim Kessler (Linke), Ulli Nissen (SPD) and Omid Nouripour (Greens) were elected as well.\nNicola Beer resigned as a member of parliament in 2019 following her election to the European Parliament where she now serves as vice president.\nEconomy and business.\nFrankfurt is one of the world's most important financial hubs and Germany's financial capital, followed by Hamburg and Stuttgart. Frankfurt was ranked eighth at the International Financial Centers Development Index (2013), eighth at the Worldwide Centres of Commerce Index (2008), ninth at the Global Financial Centres Index (September 2013), tenth at the Global Power City Index (2011), 11th at the Global City Competitiveness Index (2012), 12th at the Innovation Cities Index (2011), 14th at the World City Survey (2011) and 23rd at the Global Cities Index (2012).\nThe city's importance as a financial hub has risen since the eurozone crisis. Indications are the establishment of two institutions of the European System of Financial Supervisors (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and European Systemic Risk Board) in 2011, and the entry into force in 2014 of European Banking Supervision, by which the European Central Bank has become the central supervisory authority for the euro area banking sector.\nAccording to an annual study by Cushman &amp; Wakefield, the European Cities Monitor (2010), Frankfurt has been one of the top three cities for international companies in Europe, after London and Paris, since the survey started in 1990. It is the only German city considered to be an alpha world city (category 3) as listed by the Loughborough University group's 2010 inventory, which was a promotion from the group's 2008 inventory when it was ranked as an alpha minus world city (category 4).\nWith over 922 jobs per 1,000 inhabitants, Frankfurt has the highest concentration of jobs in Germany. On work days and Saturdays, one million people commute from all over the Rhein-Main-Area. The GRP per capita was \u20ac96,670 in 2019.\nThe city is expected to benefit from international banks relocating jobs from London to Frankfurt as a result of Brexit to retain access to the EU market. Thus far, Morgan Stanley, Citigroup Inc., Standard Chartered Plc and Nomura Holdings Inc. announced they would move their EU headquarters to Frankfurt.\nCentral banks.\nFrankfurt is home to two important central banks: the German Bundesbank and the European Central Bank (ECB).\nEuropean Central Bank.\nThe European Central Bank (\"Europ\u00e4ische Zentralbank\") is one of the world's most important central banks with a balance sheet total of around 7 trillion. The ECB sets monetary policy for the Eurozone, consisting of 19 EU member states that have adopted the Euro (\u20ac) as their common currency. From 1998 the ECB Headquarters have been located in Frankfurt, first in the Eurotower at Willy-Brandt-Platz and in two other nearby high-rises. The new Seat of the European Central Bank in the Ostend district, consisting of the former wholesale market hall (\"Gro\u00dfmarkthalle\") and a newly built 185-meter skyscraper, was completed in late 2014. The new building complex was designed to accommodate up to 2,300 ECB personnel. The location is a few kilometers away from downtown and borders an industrial area as well as the Osthafen (\"East Harbor\"), It was primarily chosen because of its large premises which allows the ECB to install security arrangements without high fences.\nThe city honors the importance of the ECB by officially using the slogan \"The City of the Euro\" since 1998.\nDeutsche Bundesbank.\nThe (German Federal Bank), located in Ginnheim, was established in 1957 as the central bank for the Federal Republic of Germany. Until the euro (\u20ac) was introduced in 1999, the Deutsche Bundesbank was responsible for the monetary policy of Germany and for the German currency, the Deutsche Mark (DM). The Bundesbank was greatly respected for its control of inflation through the second half of the 20th century. Today the Bundesbank is an integral part of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) which is formed by all 27 EU member states. Its bilance sheet total is around 2,7 trillion, making it the 4th biggest central bank.\nCommercial banks.\nIn 2010, 63 national and 152 international banks had a registered office, including the headquarters of the major German banks, as well as 41 offices of international banks. Frankfurt is therefore known as Bankenstadt (\"City of the banks\") and nicknamed \"Mainhattan\" (a portmanteau of the local Main river and Manhattan in New York City) or \"Bankfurt\". 73,200 people were employed at banks in 2010.\nOther major German banks include Frankfurter Volksbank, the second-largest \"Volksbank\" in Germany, Frankfurter Sparkasse and old-established private banks such as Bankhaus Metzler, Hauck &amp; Aufh\u00e4user and Delbr\u00fcck Bethmann Maffei.\nMany international banks have a registered or a representative office, e.g., Credit Suisse, UBS, Bank of America, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co., Bank of China, Banco do Brasil, Ita\u00fa Unibanco Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale, BNP Paribas, SEB, Royal Bank of Scotland and Barclays.\nFrankfurt Stock Exchange.\nThe Frankfurt Stock Exchange (\"Frankfurter Wertpapierb\u00f6rse\") began in the ninth century. By the 16th century Frankfurt had developed into an important European hub for trade fairs and financial services. Today the Frankfurt Stock Exchange is by far the largest in Germany, with a turnover of more than 90 percent of the German stock market and is the third-largest in Europe after the London and the Paris. The most important stock market index is the DAX, the index of the 30 largest German business companies listed at the stock exchange. The stock exchange is owned and operated by , which is itself listed in the DAX. Deutsche B\u00f6rse also owns the European futures exchange Eurex and clearing company Clearstream. \nOn 1 February 2012 European Commission blocked the proposed merger of Deutsche B\u00f6rse and NYSE Euronext. \"The merger between Deutsche B\u00f6rse and NYSE Euronext would have led to a near-monopoly in European financial derivatives worldwide. These markets are at the heart of the financial system and it is crucial for the whole European economy that they remain competitive. We tried to find a solution, but the remedies offered fell far short of resolving the concerns.\" European competition commissioner Joaqu\u00edn Almunia said.\nIt is located downtown at the B\u00f6rsenplatz. Deutsche B\u00f6rse's headquarters are formally registered in Frankfurt, but it moved most of its employees to a high-rise called \"The Cube\" in Eschborn in 2010, primarily due to significantly lower local corporate taxes.\nFrankfurt Trade Fair.\nFrankfurt Trade Fair (\"Messe Frankfurt\") has the third-largest exhibition site in the world with a total of . The trade fair premises are located in the western part between Bockenheim, the Westend and the Gallus district. It houses ten exhibition halls with a total of of space and of outdoor space.\nFrankfurt and the river Rhine tributary Main acquired transnational economic importance in the Middle Ages. In 1337 the Holy Roman Emperor Louis IV of Bavaria issued a diploma privilege so that any other city was not allowed to establish a market or trade fair if this could harm the Frankfurt Trade Fair in any way. This imperial backing allowed Frankfurt to retain the commanding importance of the Frankfurt Trade Fair for centuries. In the Middle Ages the full range of manufactured and semi-processed commodities were trade at Frankfurt Fairs.\nHosted in Frankfurt are the Frankfurt Book Fair (\"Frankfurter Buchmesse\"), the world's largest book fair, the Ambiente Frankfurt, the world's largest consumer goods fair, the Achema, the world's largest plant engineering fair, and many more like Paperworld, Christmasworld, Beautyworld, Tendence Lifestyle or Light+Building. Messe Frankfurt GmbH, the owner and operator company, organized 87 exhibitions in 2010, 51 thereof in foreign countries. It is one of the largest trade fair companies with commercial activities in over 150 countries.\nAviation.\nFrankfurt Airport is one of the busiest airports in the world and is also the single largest place of work in Germany with over 500 companies which employ 71,500 people (2010).\nFraport is the owner and operator of Frankfurt Airport. It is the airport's second-largest employer (19,800 workers in 2010). Fraport also operates other airports worldwide, e.g., King Abdulaziz International Airport in Jeddah, Jorge Ch\u00e1vez International Airport in Lima and Antalya Airport.\nThe largest company at Frankfurt Airport is Lufthansa, Germany's flag carrier and Europe's largest airline. Lufthansa employs 35,000 people in Frankfurt. The Lufthansa Aviation Center (LAC) is the main operation base of Lufthansa at Frankfurt Airport. The airport serves as Lufthansa's primary hub with 157 worldwide destinations (compared to 110 destinations at Munich Airport, Lufthansa's second-largest hub). Lufthansa Cargo is based in Frankfurt and operates its largest cargo center (LCC) at Frankfurt Airport. Lufthansa Flight Training is also based here.\nCondor is a German airline based at Frankfurt Airport.\nOther industries.\nAccountancy and professional services.\nThree of the four largest international accountancy and professional services firms \"(Big Four)\" are present.\nPricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) German headquarters are located at Tower 185. KPMG moved its European Headquarters (KPMG Europe LLP) to The Squaire. Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu are present, while Ernst &amp; Young is located in Eschborn.\nCredit rating agencies.\nThe three major international credit rating agencies \u2013 Standard &amp; Poor's, Moody's and Fitch Ratings \u2013 have their German headquarters in Frankfurt.\nInvestment trust companies.\nDWS Investments is one of the largest investment trust company in Germany and manages \u20ac859\u00a0billion fund assets. It is one of the ten largest investment trust companies in the world. Other large investment trust companies are Universal Investment, Allianz Global Investors Europe (a division of Allianz SE, and a top-five global active investment manager), Union Investment and Deka Investmentfonds.\nManagement consultancies.\nMany of the largest international management consultancies are represented, including Arthur D. Little, McKinsey &amp; Company, Boston Consulting Group, Booz &amp; Company, Oliver Wyman, Bearing Point, Capgemini, Bain &amp; Company and Roland Berger Strategy Consultants.\nReal estate services companies.\nLocated in Frankfurt are the German headquarters of Jones Lang LaSalle and BNP Paribas Real Estate.\nLaw firms.\nFrankfurt has the highest concentration of lawyers in Germany, with one lawyer per 97 inhabitants (followed by D\u00fcsseldorf with a ratio of 1/117 and Munich with 1/124) in 2005.\nMost of the large international law firms maintain offices, among them A&amp;O Shearman, Baker McKenzie, Bird &amp; Bird, Clifford Chance, Cleary Gottlieb Steen &amp; Hamilton, Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, DLA Piper, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, Hogan Lovells, Jones Day, K&amp;L Gates, Latham &amp; Watkins, Linklaters, Mayer Brown, Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy, Norton Rose, Sidley Austin, SJ Berwin, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, Taylor Wessing and White &amp; Case.\nAdvertising agencies.\nAccording to a ranking of German FOCUS magazine (November 2007) seven of the 48 largest advertising agencies in Germany are based in Frankfurt, including Havas, Dentsu, McCann-Erickson, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, JWT, and Publicis. Frankfurt is a media business cluster. Around 570 companies of the advertising industry and 270 public relations companies are located in Frankfurt.\nFood.\nFrankfurt is home to the German headquarters of Nestl\u00e9, the world's largest food company, located in Niederrad. Other important food companies are Ferrero SpA (German headquarters) and Radeberger Gruppe KG, the largest private brewery group in Germany.\nAutomotive.\nThe South-Korean automobile manufacturer Kia Motors moved its European headquarters to Frankfurt in 2007. In the same year, Italian manufacturer Fiat opened its new German headquarters. The automotive supplier Continental AG has the headquarters and a major manufacturing plant of its Chassis &amp; Safety division (formerly ITT Automotive) located in Frankfurt R\u00f6delheim.\nConstruction.\nSome of the largest German construction companies have offices, e.g., Bilfinger Berger, Hochtief, Z\u00fcblin and BAM Deutschland.\nProperty and real estate.\nFrankfurt has Germany's highest concentration of homeowners. This is partly attributed to the financial sector, but also to its cosmopolitan nature, with expatriates and immigrants representing one-fourth of its population. For this reason, Frankfurt's property market often operates differently than the rest of the country where the prices are generally flatter.\nTourism.\nFrankfurt is one of Germany's leading tourist destinations. In addition to its infrastructure and economy, its diversity supports a vibrant cultural scene. This blend of attractions led 4.3\u00a0million tourists (2012) to visit Frankfurt. The Hotels in central Frankfurt offer 34,000 beds in 228 hotels, of which 13 are luxury hotels and 46 are first-class hotels.\nOther.\nFrankfurt is home to companies from the chemical, transportation, telecommunication and energy industries. Some of the larger companies are:\nIn addition, several cloud and fintech startups have their headquarters in Frankfurt.\nUrban area (suburban) businesses.\nWithin Frankfurt's urban area are several important companies.\nThe business hub of Eschborn is located right at Frankfurt's city limits in the west and attracts businesses with significantly lower corporate taxes compared to Frankfurt. Major companies in Eschborn include Ernst &amp; Young, Vodafone Germany, Randstad NV and VR Leasing. moved most of its employees to Eschborn in 2010.\nR\u00fcsselsheim is internationally known for its automobile manufacturer Opel, one of the biggest automobile manufacturers in Germany. With 20,000 employees in 2003, Opel was one of the five largest employers in Hesse.\nOffenbach am Main is home to the European headquarters of automobile manufacturer Hyundai Motor Company, to the German headquarters of automobile manufacturer Honda, to Honeywell Germany and to Deutscher Wetterdienst, the central scientific agency that monitors weather and meteorological conditions over Germany.\nTwo DAX companies are located in Bad Homburg vor der H\u00f6he, Fresenius SE &amp; Co. KGaA and Fresenius Medical Care. Other major companies are Hewlett-Packard, Bridgestone, Deutsche Leasing and Basler Versicherungen.\nKronberg im Taunus is home of the German headquarters of automobile manufacturer Jaguar Cars as well as the German headquarters of Accenture.\nLufthansa Systems, a subsidiary of Lufthansa, is located in Kelsterbach.\nLSG Sky Chefs, another subsidiary of Lufthansa, is located in Neu-Isenburg.\nThe German headquarters of Thomas Cook Group are based in Oberursel.\nLangen is home to Deutsche Flugsicherung, the German air traffic control.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nFrankfurt is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendly cities.\nFrankfurt has friendly relations with:\nCityscape.\nLandmarks.\nR\u00f6mer.\nR\u00f6mer, the German word for Roman, is a complex of nine houses that form the Frankfurt city hall (\"Rathaus\"). The houses were acquired by the city council in 1405 from a wealthy merchant family. The middle house became the city hall and was later connected with its neighbors. The \"Kaisersaal\" (\"Emperor's Hall\") is located on the upper floor and is where the newly crowned emperors held their banquets. The R\u00f6mer was partially destroyed in World War II and later rebuilt. The surrounding square, the R\u00f6merberg, is named after the city hall.\nThe former Altstadt (old town) quarter between the R\u00f6mer and the Frankfurt Cathedral was redeveloped as the Dom-R\u00f6mer Quarter from 2012 to 2018, including 15 reconstructions of historical buildings that were destroyed during World War II.\nGerman National Library.\nFrankfurt is one of two sites of the German National Library (\"Deutsche Nationalbibliothek\"), the other being Leipzig. The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek is a universal library in Germany. Its task, unique in Germany, is to collect, permanently archive, comprehensively document and record bibliographically all German and German-language publications from 1913 on, foreign publications about Germany, translations of German works and the works of German-speaking emigrants published abroad between 1933 and 1945, and to make them available to the public.\nFrankfurt Cathedral.\nFrankfurt Cathedral () is not a cathedral, but the main Catholic church, dedicated to St. Bartholomew. The Gothic building was constructed in the 14th and 15th centuries on the foundation of an earlier church from the Merovingian time. From 1356 onwards, kings of the Holy Roman Empire were elected in this church, and from 1562 to 1792, Roman-German emperors were crowned there.\nSince the 18th century, St. Bartholomew's has been called , although it was never a bishop's seat. In 1867 it was destroyed by fire and rebuilt in its present style. It was again partially destroyed in World War II and rebuilt in the 1950s. Its height is . The cathedral tower has a viewing platform open to the public at a height of , accessed through a narrow spiral staircase with 386 steps.\nSt. Paul's Church.\nSt. Paul's Church is a national historic monument in Germany because it was the seat of the first democratically elected parliament in 1848. It was established in 1789 as a Protestant church, but was not completed until 1833. Its importance has its roots in the Frankfurt Parliament, which met in the church during the revolutionary years of 1848/49 in order to write a constitution for a united Germany. The attempt failed because the monarchs of Prussia and Austria did not want to lose power. In 1849, Prussian troops ended the democratic experiment by force and the parliament dissolved; the building was once more used for religious services.\nSt. Paul's was partially destroyed in World War II with its interior significantly damaged. It was quickly and symbolically rebuilt after the war albeit with modern alterations particularly to the interior; today it is used mainly for exhibitions and events.\nArch\u00e4ologischer Garten Frankfurt.\nThe Archaeological Garden contains small parts of the oldest recovered buildings: an ancient Roman settlement and the Frankfurt Royal Palace (\"Kaiserpfalz Frankfurt\") from the sixth century. The garden is located between the R\u00f6merberg and the cathedral. It was discovered after World War II when the area was heavily bombed and later partly rebuilt. The remains were preserved and are now open to the public. From 2013 until 2015 an event building, the Stadthaus (\"City house\"), has been built on top of the garden, but it remains open to the public free of charge.\nHaus Wertheim.\nWertheim House is the only timbered house in the Altstadt district that survived the heavy bombings of World War II undamaged. It is located on the R\u00f6merberg next to the Historical Museum.\nSaalhof.\nThe Saalhof is the oldest conserved building in the Altstadt district and dates to the 12th century. It was used as an exhibition hall by Dutch clothiers when trade fairs were held during the 14th and 15th centuries. The Saalhof was partly destroyed in World War II and later rebuilt. Today it serves as a part of the Historical Museum.\nEiserner Steg.\nThe Eiserner Steg (Iron Bridge) is a pedestrian-only bridge across the Main that connects R\u00f6merberg and Sachsenhausen. It was built in 1868 and was the second bridge to cross the river. After World War II, when it was blown up by the Wehrmacht, it was quickly rebuilt in 1946. Today some 10,000 people cross the bridge on a daily basis.\nAlte Oper.\nThe Alte Oper is a former opera house, hence the name \"Old Opera\". The opera house was built in 1880 by architect Richard Lucae. It was one of the major opera houses in Germany until it was heavily damaged in World War II. Until the late 1970s, it was a ruin, nicknamed \"Germany's most beautiful ruin\". Former Frankfurt Lord Mayor Rudi Arndt called for blowing it up in the 1960s, which earned him the nickname \"Dynamite-Rudi\". (Later on, Arndt said he never had meant his suggestion seriously.)\nPublic pressure led to its refurbishment and reopening in 1981. Today, it functions as a famous concert hall, while operas are performed at the \"new\" Frankfurt Opera. The inscription on the frieze of the Alte Oper says: \"Dem Wahren, Sch\u00f6nen, Guten\" (\"To the true, the beautiful, the good\").\nEschenheimer Turm.\nThe Eschenheim Tower (\"Eschenheimer Turm\") was erected at the beginning of the 15th century and served as a city gate as part of late-medieval fortifications. It is the oldest and most unaltered building in the Innenstadt district.\nSt. Catherine's Church.\nSt. Catherine's Church is the largest Protestant church, dedicated to Catherine of Alexandria, a martyred early Christian saint. It is located downtown at the entrance to the Zeil, the central pedestrian shopping street.\nHauptwache.\nAlthough today Hauptwache is mostly associated with the inner-city underground train station of the same name, the name originates from a baroque building on the square above the station. The Hauptwache building was constructed in 1730 and was used as a prison, therefore the name that translates as \"main guard-house\". Today the square surrounding the building is also called \"Hauptwache\" (formal: ). It is situated downtown opposite to St. Catherine's Church.\nCentral Station.\nFrankfurt Central Station (\"Frankfurt Hauptbahnhof\"), which opened in 1888, was built as the central train station for Frankfurt to replace three smaller downtown train stations and to boost the needed capacity for travellers. It was constructed as a terminus station and was the largest train station in Europe by floor area until 1915 when Leipzig Central Station was opened. Its three main halls were constructed in a neorenaissance-style, while the later enlargement with two outer halls in 1924 was constructed in neoclassic-style.\nFrankfurter Hof.\nThe Frankfurter Hof is a landmark downtown hotel at Kaiserplatz, built from 1872 to 1876. It is part of Steigenberger Hotels group and is considered the city's most prestigious.\nSt. Leonhard.\nSt. Leonhard, on the Main close to the bridge Eiserner Steg, is a Catholic late Gothic hall church, derived from a Romanesque style basilica beginning in 1425. It is the only one of nine churches in the Old Town that survived World War II almost undamaged. The parish serves the English-speaking community. The church has been under restoration from 2011 until 2019.\nGr\u00fcnderzeit quarters.\nAround the city centre there are widespread quarters full of Gr\u00fcnderzeit architecture. Buildings of that type often sport richly decorated fa\u00e7ades in the form of Historicism such as Gothic Revival, Renaissance Revival, German Renaissance and Baroque Revival.\nTimber-framed old towns.\nAround the city center of Frankfurt are several former independent villages, now part of the city, with timber-framed centres and even whole old towns like H\u00f6chst, Seckbach, Niederursel and Bergen-Enkheim. Overall there are around 14.500 buildings in Frankfurt built before 1919 and around 3.000 of them are timber framed houses.\nSkyscrapers.\nFrankfurt is unique among German cities with regards to skyscrapers. Since the 1970s some of the tallest buildings in Germany have been built along the Mainzer Landstrasse. The Main Tower was completed in 1999 with its top floor skydeck and penthouse restaurant designed to be open to tourists. Frankfurt hosts 20 out of Germany's 21 skyscrapers. Most skyscrapers and high-rise office buildings are located in the financial district (Bankenviertel), around the trade fair premises (Europaviertel) and at Mainzer Landstra\u00dfe between Opernplatz and Platz der Republik, which connects the two areas.\nThe 20 skyscrapers are:\nOther high-rise buildings include:\nHistory of high-rise buildings.\nFor centuries, St. Bartholomeus's Cathedral was the tallest structure. The first building to exceed the 95-meter-high cathedral was not an office building but a grain silo high. The Henninger Turm was opened in the 1960s and the silo was topped by a revolving restaurant designed to be a landmark. The Henninger Turm was extensively refurbished and is now a residential high-rise.\nThe first high-rise building boom came in the 1970s when Westend Gate (then called \"Plaza B\u00fcro Center\") and Silberturm were constructed and became the tallest buildings in Germany with a height of 159.3 meters and 166.3 meters, respectively. Around the same time, Frankfurter B\u00fcro Center and City-Haus (142.4 meters and 142.1 meters) were constructed at Mainzer Landstra\u00dfe and Eurotower (148.0 meters) and Garden Tower (127.0 meters; then called \"Helaba-Hochhaus\") were constructed in the financial district.\nNone of the buildings constructed during the 1980s surpassed Silberturm. The most famous buildings from this decade are the Deutsche Bank Twin Towers at Taunusanlage, both 155.0 meters tall.\nThe 1990s featured a second wave. Messeturm, built on the trade fair site, reached a height of and became the tallest building in Europe by 1991. It was overtaken by the Commerzbank Tower in 1997. Other tall buildings from this decade are Westendstrasse 1 (), Main Tower () and Trianon ().\nIn 21st-century Frankfurt, more high-rise buildings and skyscrapers (e.g., Skyper, Opernturm, Tower 185, Seat of the European Central Bank, Taunusturm) emerged, but none have surpassed Commerzbank Tower.\nGreen city.\nWith a large forest, many parks, the Main riverbanks and the two botanical gardens, Frankfurt is considered a \"green city\": More than 50 percent of the area within the city limits are protected green areas.\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nWith more than 30 museums, Frankfurt has one of the largest variety of museums in Europe. Most museums are part of the Museumsufer, located on the front row of both sides of the Main riverbank or nearby, which was created on an initiative by cultural politician Hilmar Hoffmann.\nTen museums are located on the southern riverbank in Sachsenhausen between the Eiserner Steg and the Friedensbr\u00fccke. The street itself, Schaumainkai, is partially closed to traffic on Saturdays for Frankfurt's largest flea market.\nTwo museums are located on the northern riverbank:\nNot directly located on the northern riverbank in the Altstadt district are:\nAnother important museum is located in the Westend district:\nOther museums are the Dialogmuseum (Dialogue Museum) in the Ostend district, Eintracht Frankfurt Museum at Deutsche Bank Park, the Frankfurter Feldbahnmuseum (Light Railway Museum Frankfurt) in the Gallus district, the Verkehrsmuseum Frankfurt (Transport Museum Frankfurt) in the Schwanheim district, the Hammer Museum in the Bahnhofsviertel district and the Geldmuseum der Deutschen Bundesbank (Money Museum of the German Federal Bank) in the Ginnheim district.\nThe Explora Museum+Wissenschaft+Technik (Explora Museum of Science and Engineering) in the Nordend district was closed in 2016. Most museums open around 10:00 am local time, and it is possible to comfortably visit four museums in one day, a fact many tourists take advantage of.\nPerforming arts.\nMusic.\nEurodance and Trance music originated in Frankfurt. In 1989 German producers Michael M\u00fcnzing and Luca Anzilotti (under the pseudonyms Benito Benites and John \"Virgo\" Garrett III) formed the Snap! project. Snap! songs combined Rap and Soul vocals adding rhythm by using computer technology and mixing electronic sounds, bass and drums. By doing so a new genre was born: Eurodance. In the early 1990s, DJs including Sven V\u00e4th and DJ DAG (of Dance 2 Trance) first played a harder, deeper style of acid house that became popular worldwide over the next decade as Trance music. Some of the early and most influential Eurodance, Trance and Techno acts, e.g., La Bouche, Jam and Spoon, Magic Affair, Culture Beat, Snap!, Dance 2 Trance, Oliver Lieb and Hardfloor, and record labels such as Harthouse and Eye Q, were based in the city in the early 1990s.\nBotanical gardens.\nFrankfurt is home to two major botanical gardens:\nNightlife.\nFrankfurt offers a variety of restaurants, bars, pubs and clubs. Clubs concentrate in and around downtownand in the Ostend district, mainly close to Hanauer Landstra\u00dfe. Restaurants, bars and pubs concentrate in Sachsenhausen, Nordend, Bornheim and Bockenheim.\nIn electronic music, Frankfurt was a pioneering city in the late 1980s and early 1990s, with renowned DJs including Sven V\u00e4th, Marc Trauner, Scot Project and Kai Tracid. One of the main venues of the early Trance music sound was the Omen nightclub from 1988 to 1998. Another popular disco club of the 1980s\u20131990s and a hotspot for Techno/Trance music was the Dorian Gray, which was located within Terminal 1 at Frankfurt Airport from 1978 to 2000. Further popular venues were the U60311 (1998\u20132012) and the Coocoon Club in Fechenheim (2004\u20132012). Notable live music venues of the past include the Sinkkasten Arts Club (1971\u20132011) and the King Kamehameha Club (1999\u20132013).\nAmong the most popular active rock and pop concert venues is the Batschkapp in Seckbach, which opened in 1976 as a center for autonomous and left-wing counterculture.\nQuality of life.\nIn a 2001 ranking by the University of Liverpool, Frankfurt was rated the richest city in Europe by GDP per capita, followed by Karlsruhe, Paris and Munich.\nFrankfurt was voted the seventh in the Mercer Quality of Living Survey by the Mercer Quality of Living Survey (2012), seventh in the Mercer Quality of Living Survey (2010) and 18th at the Economist's World's Most Liveable Cities Survey (2011). According to an annual citizen survey (2010), arranged by the city council, 66 percent inhabitants are satisfied or highly satisfied with the city, while only 6 percent said that they are dissatisfied. Compared to the 1993's survey the number of satisfied inhabitants has grown about 22 percent while the number of dissatisfied inhabitants was reduced by 8 percent. 84 percent of the inhabitants like to live in Frankfurt, 13 percent would rather choose to live somewhere else. 37 percent are satisfied with the public safety (1993: only 9 percent), 22 percent are dissatisfied (1993: 64 percent).\nFrankfurt consistently has the highest levels of crime per 100,000 inhabitants in Germany (15.976 crimes per annum in 2008) and is therefore dubbed the German \"crime capital\". However, this statistic is often criticized because it ignores major factors: It is calculated based on the administrative 680,000-inhabitant figure while the urban area has 2.5 M inhabitants and on weekdays adds another million people (not counting the 53 million passengers passing through the airport each year). The rate for personal safety-relevant crimes such as murder, manslaughter, rape or bodily harm, is 3.4 percent, placing Frankfurt twelfth in the ranking (related to the official 680,000-inhabitant figure) or number 21 (related to the one-million-figure). In 2018, the state of Hesse, where Frankfurt is located, was ranked the third-safest state in Germany.\nTransport.\nAirports.\nFrankfurt Airport.\nThe city can be accessed from around the world via Frankfurt Airport (\"Flughafen Frankfurt am Main\") located southwest of downtown. The airport has four runways and serves 265 nonstop destinations. Run by transport company Fraport it ranks among the world's busiest airports by passenger traffic and is the busiest airport by cargo traffic in Europe. The airport also serves as a hub for Condor and as the main hub for German flag carrier Lufthansa. It is the busiest airport in Europe in terms of cargo traffic, and the fourth busiest in Europe in terms of passenger traffic behind London Heathrow Airport, Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport and Amsterdam Airport Schiphol. Passenger traffic at Frankfurt Airport in 2018 was 69,510,269 passengers.\nA third terminal is being constructed (planned to open in 2026). The third terminal will increase the capacity of the airport to over 90 million passengers per year.\nThe airport can be reached by car or bus and has two railway stations, one for regional and one for long-distance traffic. The S-Bahn lines S8 and S9 (direction \"Offenbach Ost\" or \"Hanau Hbf\") departing at the regional station take 10\u201315 minutes from the airport to Frankfurt Central Station and onwards to Hauptwache station downtown. The IC and ICE trains departing at the long-distance station take 10 minutes to Frankfurt Central Station.\nFrankfurt Hahn Airport.\nDespite the name, Frankfurt Hahn Airport (\"Flughafen Frankfurt-Hahn\") is situated approximately from the city in Lautzenhausen (Rhineland-Palatinate). Hahn Airport is a major base for low-cost carrier Ryanair. This airport can only be reached by car or bus. An hourly bus service runs from Frankfurt Central Station, taking just over 2 hours. Passenger traffic at Hahn Airport in 2010 was 3.5\u00a0million.\nFrankfurt Egelsbach Airport.\nFrankfurt Egelsbach Airport (\"Flugplatz Frankfurt-Egelsbach\") is a busy general aviation airport located south-east of Frankfurt Airport, near Egelsbach.\nRoads.\nFrankfurt is a traffic hub for the German motorway (\"Autobahn\") system. The Frankfurter Kreuz is an Autobahn interchange close to the airport, where the Bundesautobahn 3 (A3), Cologne to W\u00fcrzburg, and the Bundesautobahn 5 (A5), Basel to Hanover, meet. With approximately 320,000 cars passing through it every day, it is Europe's most heavily used interchange. The Bundesautobahn 66 (A66) connects Frankfurt with Wiesbaden in the west and Fulda in the east. The Bundesautobahn 661 (A661) is mainly a commuter motorway that starts in the south (Egelsbach), runs through the eastern part and ends in the north (Oberursel). The Bundesautobahn 648 (A648) is a very short motorway in the western part which primarily serves as a fast connection between the A 66 and the Frankfurt Trade Fair. The A5 in the west, the A3 in the south and the A661 in the northeast form a ring road around the inner city districts and define a Low-emission zone (\"Umweltzone\"; established in 2008), meaning that vehicles have to meet certain emission criteria to enter the zone.\nThe streets of central Frankfurt are usually congested with cars during rush hour. Some areas, especially around the shopping streets Zeil, Goethestra\u00dfe and Fre\u00dfgass, are pedestrian-only streets.\nRailway stations.\nFrankfurt Central Station.\nFrankfurt Hauptbahnhof \"(\"often abbreviated as \"Frankfurt (Main) Hbf\" or \"F-Hbf\") is the largest railway station in Germany by railway traffic. By daily passenger volume, it ranks second (493,000 each) after Hamburg Central Station (550,000). It is located between the Gallus, the Gutleutviertel and the Bahnhofsviertel district, not far away from the trade fair and the financial district. It serves as a major hub for long-distance trains (InterCity, ICE) and regional trains as well as for Frankfurt's public transport system. It is a stop for most of ICE high-speed lines, making it Germany's most important ICE station. ICE Trains to London via the Channel Tunnel were planned for 2013. All Rhine-Main S-Bahn lines, two U-Bahn lines (U4, U5), several tram and bus lines stop there. Regional and local trains are integrated in the Public transport system Rhein-Main-Verkehrsverbund (RMV), the second-largest integrated public transport system in the world, after Verkehrsverbund Berlin-Brandenburg.\nFrankfurt Airport stations.\nFrankfurt Airport can be accessed by two railway stations: Frankfurt Airport long-distance station (\"Frankfurt Flughafen Fernbahnhof\") is only for long-distance traffic and connects the airport to the main rail network, with most of the ICE services using the Cologne-Frankfurt high-speed rail line. The long-distance station is located outside the actual airport ground but has a connecting bridge for pedestrians to Terminal 1, concourse B. Frankfurt Airport regional station (\"Frankfurt Flughafen Regionalbahnhof\") is for local S-Bahn trains (lines S8, S9) and regional trains. The regional station is located within Terminal 1, concourse B.\nFrankfurt South station.\nFrankfurt's third long-distance station is Frankfurt South station (\"Frankfurt S\u00fcdbahnhof\", often abbreviated as \"Frankfurt (Main) S\u00fcd\" or \"F-S\u00fcd\"), located in Sachsenhausen. It is an important destination for local trains and trams (lines 15, 16 and 18) and the terminal stop for four U-Bahn lines (U1, U2, U3, U8) as well as three S-Bahn lines (S3, S4, S5). Line S6 also serves the station.\nMesse stations.\nThe Frankfurt Trade Fair offers two railway stations: Messe station is for local S-Bahn trains (lines S3-S6) and is centrally located amid trade fair premises, while Festhalle/Messe station is served by U-Bahn line U4 and is located at the north-east corner of the premises.\nKonstablerwache station and Hauptwache station.\nTwo other major downtown railway stations are Konstablerwache and Hauptwache, located on each end of the Zeil. They are the main stations to change from east-to-west-bound S-Bahn trains to north-to-south-bound U-Bahn trains. Konstablerwache station is the second-busiest railway station regarding daily passenger volume (98,000) after the central station. The third-busiest railway station is Hauptwache station (93,000).\nFrankfurt West Station.\nThis Station, located in Bockenheim, is served by north-heading Long-Distance ICE trains, multiple regional trains, and four commuter S-Bahn lines (S3, S4, S5, S6). Additionally, it is an important terminal stop for three \"Metrobus\" lines (M32, M36, M73).\nCoach stations.\nThere are three stations for intercity bus services in Frankfurt: one at the south side of the Central Station, one at the Terminal 2 of the airport and another one at Stephanstra\u00dfe.\nPublic transport.\nThe city has two rapid transit systems: the U-Bahn and the S-Bahn, as well as an above-ground tram system. Information about the U- and S-Bahn can be found on the website of the RMV.\nS-Bahn.\nNine S-Bahn lines (S1 to S9) connect Frankfurt with the densely populated Rhine Main Region. Most routes have at least 15-minute service during the day, either by one line running every 15 minutes, or by two lines servicing one route at a 30-minute interval. All lines, except line S7, run through the Frankfurt City Tunnel and serve stations at Ostendstra\u00dfe, Konstablerwache, Hauptwache, Taunusanlage and Frankfurt Central Station. When leaving the city the S-Bahn travels above ground. It provides access to the trade fair (S3, S4, S5, S6), the airport (S8, S9), the stadium (S7, S8, S9) and nearby cities such as Wiesbaden, Mainz, Darmstadt, R\u00fcsselsheim, Hanau, Offenbach am Main, Oberursel, Bad Homburg, Kronberg, Friedberg and smaller towns that are on the way. The S8/S9 runs 24/7.\nU-Bahn.\nThe U-Bahn has nine lines (U1 to U9) serving Frankfurt and the larger suburbs of Bad Homburg and Oberursel in the north. The trains that run on the U-Bahn are in fact light rail (\"Stadtbahn\") as many lines travel along a track in the middle of the street instead of underground. The minimum service interval is 2.5 minutes, although the usual pattern is that each line runs at 7.5- to 10-minute intervals, which produce between 3- and 5-minute intervals on downtown tracks shared by more than one line.\nTram.\nFrankfurt has ten tram lines (11, 12, 14 to 21), with trams arriving usually every 10 minutes. Many sections are served by two lines, combining to run at 5-minute intervals during rush-hour. Trams only run above ground and serve more stops than the U-Bahn or the S-Bahn.\nBus.\nA number of bus lines complete the Frankfurt public transport system. Night buses replace U-Bahn and tram services between 1:30\u00a0am and 3:30\u00a0am. The central junction for the night bus service is at the downtown square of Konstablerwache, where all night bus lines start and end.\nTaxis.\nTaxicabs can usually be found outside the major S-Bahn and U-Bahn stations, at the central station, the south station, the airport, the trade fair and in the crowded inner-city shopping streets. The common way to obtain a taxi is to either call a taxi operator or to go to a taxi rank. However, although not the norm, one can hail a passing taxi on the street.\nUber ceased operations in Frankfurt on 9 November 2015 after operating in the city for 18 months. However, UberX and local cabs are available through the Uber app.\nBicycles.\n makes bicycles available for hire through their Call a Bike service. The bicycles are stationed all over the city, including at selected railway stations. They can easily be spotted because of their eye-catching silver-red color. To rent a specific bike, riders either call a service number to get an unlock code or reserve the bike via the smartphone application. To return the bike, the rider locks it within a designated return area (and calls the service number, if not booked via the app).\nNextbike also makes bicycles available for hire in Frankfurt. They are stationed all over the city. These can be spotted with their blue color scheme.\nCycle rickshaws (velotaxis), a type of tricycle designed to carry passengers in addition to the driver, are also available. These are allowed to operate in pedestrian-only areas and are therefore practical for sightseeing.\nFrankfurt has a network of cycle routes. Many long-distance bike routes into the city have cycle tracks that are separate from motor vehicle traffic. A number of downtown roads are \"bicycle streets\" where the cyclist has the right of way and where motorized vehicles are only allowed access if they do not disrupt the cycle users. In addition, cyclists are allowed to ride many cramped one-way streets in both directions. As of 2015[ [update]], 15 percent of citizens used bicycles.\nE-Scooters.\nSince 15 June 2019, the use of e-scooters was officially permitted by the German federal government. In Frankfurt, companies like Lime, TIER, Bird, voi., Dott or Bolt are offering their electric micro mobility vehicles for lease. However, their use is being regarded with increasing weariness due to frequent abuse (parking, speeding, vandalism, accidents) and has sparked a public debate about the need of further regulation of the e-scooter market.\nCourts of justice.\nSeveral courts are located in Frankfurt, including:\nFinancial authorities.\nEuropean Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority.\nThe European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) is an institution of the EU and part of the European System of Financial Supervisors that was created in response to the 2008 financial crisis. It was established on 1 January 2011.\nFederal Financial Supervisory Authority.\nFrankfurt is one of two locations of the German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (\"Bundesanstalt f\u00fcr Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht\", short: \"BaFin\"). The BaFin is an independent federal institution and acts as Germany's financial regulatory authority.\nAnti-Money Laundering Authority.\nThe Anti-Money Laundering Authority (AMLA) of the European Union (EU) is based in Frankfurt.\nInternational relations.\nInternational Finance Corporation.\nFrankfurt is home to the German office of the International Finance Corporation (IFC), which is part of the World Bank Group. The IFC promotes sustainable private sector investment in developing countries.\nConsulates.\nAs a profoundly international city, Frankfurt hosts 93 diplomatic missions (consulates and consulates-general). The Consulate General of the United States in Eckenheim is the largest American consulate in the world.\nEducation and research.\nUniversities and schools.\nFrankfurt hosts two universities and several specialist schools. The two business schools are Goethe University Frankfurt's Goethe Business School and Frankfurt School of Finance &amp; Management.\nJohann Wolfgang Goethe University.\nThe oldest and best-known university is the Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, with locations in Bockenheim, Westend, and Riedberg, and the university hospital in Niederrad. Goethe Business School is part of the university's House of Finance at Campus Westend. The Business School's Full-Time MBA program has over 70% international students.\nFrankfurt University of Applied Sciences.\nThe Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences was created out of several older organisations in 1971, and offers over 38 study areas, in the arts, sciences, engineering and law. Some of the most important research projects: Planet Earth Simulator, FraLine-IT-School-Service, quantitative analysis of methane in human corpses with the help of a mass spectrometer, software engineering (e.g., fraDesk), analysis of qualitative and quantitative gas in human lungs, long-term studies on photovoltaic modules (to name only a few).\nFrankfurt School of Finance and Management.\nThe city is also home to a business school, Frankfurt School of Finance &amp; Management, formerly known as the \"\" (Institution of Higher Learning for Banking Economics), with its new campus near Deutsche Nationalbibliothek U-Bahn stop (recently moving from its previous location in the Ostend (Eastend) neighborhood). In 2001, it became a specialist institution for Economics and Management, or FOM. Frankfurt School is consistently ranked among the best business schools in the world, attributed to its high research output and quality of undergraduate and graduate training.\nSt\u00e4delschule.\nFrankfurt has the State Institution of Higher Learning for Artistic Education known as the St\u00e4delschule, founded in 1817 by Johann Friedrich St\u00e4del. It was taken over by the city in 1942 and turned into a state art school.\nMusic schools and conservatory.\nMusic institutions are the Frankfurt University of Music and Performing Arts, and the Hoch Conservatory (Dr. Hoch's Konservatorium) which was founded in 1878. The International Ensemble Modern Academy is a significant institution for the study of contemporary music.\nOther notable schools.\nThe Sankt Georgen Graduate School of Philosophy and Theology (German:\"Philosophisch-Theologische Hochschule Sankt Georgen\"), a private institution with membership in the German Jesuit Association, has been located in Sachsenhausen since 1950.\nEducation and media.\nFrankfurt schools rank among the best-equipped schools nationwide for the availability of PCs and other media facilities. In order to assure maintenance and support of the school PCs, the city in cooperation with the University of Applied Sciences launched the project Fraline \u2013 IT-Schul-Service, an initiative employing students to provide basic school IT-support.\nResearch institutes.\nThe city is home to three Max Planck Society institutes: the Max Planck Institute for Legal History and Legal Theory, Max Planck Institute for Biophysics, and the Max Planck Institute for Brain Research.\nThe Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies, sponsored by several institutional and private sources, is involved in theoretical research in physics, chemistry, neuroscience, and computer science.\nFrankfurt is host to the \"R\u00f6misch-Germanische-Kommission\" (RGK), the German Archaeological Institute branch for prehistoric archeology in Germany and Europe. The RGK is involved in a variety of research projects. Its library, with over 200,000 items, is one of the largest archeological libraries in the world.\nGoethe University and Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences are involved in the Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (\"hessian.AI\").\nTrade unions and associations.\nFrankfurt is home to multiple trade unions and associations, including:\nTrade associations include:\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nTwo important daily newspapers are published. The conservative \"Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung\", also known as \"FAZ\", was founded in 1949 and is the German newspaper with the widest circulation outside of Germany, with its editors claiming to deliver the newspaper to 148 countries every day. The FAZ has a circulation of over 380,000 copies daily. The other important newspaper, the \"Frankfurter Rundschau\", was first published in 1945 and has a daily circulation of over 181,000.\nMagazines.\nSeveral magazines also originate from Frankfurt. The local \"Journal Frankfurt\" is the best-known magazine for events, parties, and \"insider tips\". \"\u00d6ko-Test\" is a consumer-oriented magazine that focuses on ecological topics. \"Titanic\" is a well-known and often criticized satirical magazine with a circulation of approximately 100,000.\nRadio and TV.\nFrankfurt's first radio station was the S\u00fcdwestdeutsche Rundfunkdienst AG (Southwest German Broadcast Service), founded in 1924. Its successor service is the public broadcaster Hessischer Rundfunk (Hessian Broadcast Service). It is located at the \"Funkhaus am Dornbusch\" in the Dornbusch district and is one of the most important radio and television broadcasters in Hesse, with additional studios in Kassel, Darmstadt and Fulda.\nBloomberg TV and RTL Television have regional studios.\nOther radio broadcasters include Main FM and Radio X.\nFrom August 1945 to October 2004, the American Forces Network (AFN) had broadcast from Frankfurt (AFN Frankfurt). Due to troop reductions the AFN's location has been closed with AFN now broadcasting from Mannheim.\nNews agency.\nFrankfurt is home to the German office of Reuters, a global news agency. Associated Press and US-based international news agency Feature Story News have bureaux in Frankfurt.\nSports.\nFrankfurt is home to several professional sports teams. Some of them have won German Championships. E.g. the Skyliners Frankfurt won the German Basketball Championship in 2004 and the German Cup in 2000. Women's side 1. FFC Frankfurt (merged with Eintracht Frankfurt in 2020) are Germany's record title-holders; Eintracht Frankfurt are one-time German champions, five-times winners of the DFB-Pokal, and winners of the UEFA Cup in 1980 and the Europa League in 2022.\nFrankfurt hosts the following sports teams or clubs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrankfurt is host to the classic cycle race Eschborn-Frankfurt City Loop (known as \"Rund um den Henninger-Turm\" from 1961 to 2008). The city hosts also the annual Frankfurt Marathon and the Ironman Germany. In addition to the former, it is one of 13 global host locations to the J.P. Morgan Corporate Challenge, Germany's biggest corporate sports event. Rhein-Main Eissport Club forms the base of the German bandy community.\nSights in the Frankfurt Rhein-Main area.\nBesides the tourist attractions in central Frankfurt many internationally famous sites are within 80\u00a0km (50\u00a0mi) of the city, such as:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10993", "revid": "17753739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10993", "title": "Albert, King of Saxony", "text": "King of Saxony from 1873 to 1902\nAlbert (23 April 1828 \u2013 19 June 1902) was King of Saxony from 29 October 1873 until his death in 1902.\nHe was the eldest son of Prince John (who succeeded his brother Frederick Augustus II on the Saxon throne as King John in 1854) by his wife Amalie Auguste of Bavaria.\nAlbert had a successful military career, leading Saxon troops that participated in the First Schleswig War, the Austro-Prussian War, and the Franco-Prussian War.\nEarly life.\nAlbert's education, as usual with German princes, concentrated to a great extent on military matters, but he attended lectures at the University of Bonn. His first experience of warfare came in 1849, when he served as a captain in the First War of Schleswig against Denmark.\nWhen the Austro-Prussian War broke out in 1866, Albert, then Crown Prince (German: \"Kronprinz\"), took up the command of the Saxon forces opposing the Prussian Army of Prince Friedrich Karl of Prussia. No attempt was made to defend Saxony, and the Saxons fell back into Bohemia and effected a junction with the Austrians. They took a prominent part in the battles by which the Prussians forced the line of the Jizera and in the Battle of Ji\u010d\u00edn. The Crown Prince, however, succeeded in effecting the retreat in good order, and in the decisive Battle of K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tz (3 July 1866), he held the extreme left of the Austrian position. The Saxons maintained their post with great tenacity but were involved in the disastrous defeat of their allies.\nDuring the operations, the Crown Prince won the reputation of a thorough soldier. After peace was made and Saxony had entered the North German Confederation, he gained the command of the Saxon army, which had now become the XII army corps of the North German army, and in that position, he carried out the necessary reorganisation. He proved a firm adherent of the Prussian alliance. On the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, he again commanded the Saxons, who were included in the 2nd army under Prince Friedrich Karl of Prussia, his old opponent. At the Battle of Gravelotte, they formed the extreme left of the German army, and with the Prussian Guard carried out the attack on St Privat, the final and decisive action in the battle.\nIn the reorganisation of the army which accompanied the march towards Paris, the Crown Prince gained a separate command over the 4th army (Army of the Meuse) consisting of the Saxons, the Prussian Guard corps, and the IV (Prussian Saxony) corps. He was succeeded in command of the XII corps by his brother Prince George, who had served under him in Bohemia.\nAlbert took a leading part in the operations which preceded the battle of Sedan, the 4th army being the pivot on which the whole army wheeled round in pursuit of MacMahon; and the actions of Buzancy and Beaumont on 29 and 30 August 1870 were fought under his direction. In the Battle of Sedan itself (1 September 1870), with the troops under his orders, Albert carried out the envelopment of the French on the east and the north.\nAlbert's conduct in the engagements won for him the complete confidence of the army, and during the Siege of Paris, his troops formed the north-east section of the investing force. During the siege, he blocked French attempts to break out of the encirclement at Le Bourget and Villiers. After the conclusion of the Treaty of Frankfurt (1871), he was left in command of the German army of occupation, a position which he held till the fall of the Paris Commune. On the conclusion of peace, he was made an inspector-general of the army and a field marshal.\nKing.\nOn the death of his father, King John on 29 October 1873, the Crown Prince succeeded to the throne as King Albert. His reign proved uneventful, and he took little public part in politics, devoting himself to military affairs, in which his advice and experience were of the greatest value, not only to the Saxon corps but also to the German army in general. During his reign, the Saxon monarchy became constitutional.\nIn the 1870s, Albert initiated the construction of a Dresden suburb, the Albertstadt. It was then the largest garrison in Germany. Near the former suburb other buildings and places still bear his name: the Albertbr\u00fccke, the Alberthafen, the Albertplatz and the Albertinum.\nIn 1879, he initiated the reconstruction of the Saint Afra School in Meissen. In 1897, he was appointed arbitrator between the claimants for the Principality of Lippe.\nMarriage and succession.\nIn Dresden on 18 June 1853, Albert married Princess Carola, daughter of Gustav, Prince of Vasa and granddaughter of Gustav IV Adolf, the second to last king of Sweden of the House of Holstein-Gottorp. The marriage was childless although Carola miscarried many times. They included:\nAlbert died at his Sibyllenort Palace on 19 June 1902 and was succeeded by his brother, who became King George. He was buried in Dresden on 23 June, among the mourners present were both the German Emperor Wilhelm II and the Austrian Emperor Franz Joseph I.\nHonours, decorations and awards.\nThe King of Saxony bird-of-paradise was named in Albert's honour; the Queen Carola's parotia was named for his wife.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10996", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10996", "title": "Fran\u00e7ois d'Aguilon", "text": "Belgian Jesuit mathematician, physicist and architect (1567\u20131617)\nFran\u00e7ois d'Aguilon (; also d'Aguillon or in Latin Franciscus Aguilonius) (4 January 1567 \u2013 20 March 1617) was a Jesuit, mathematician, physicist, and architect from the Spanish Netherlands.\nD'Aguilon was born in Brussels; his father was a secretary to Philip II of Spain. He became a Jesuit in Tournai in 1586. In 1598 he moved to Antwerp, where he helped plan the construction of the Saint Carolus Borromeus church. In 1611, he started a special school of mathematics in Antwerp, fulfilling a dream of Christopher Clavius for a Jesuit mathematical school; in 1616, he was joined there by Gr\u00e9goire de Saint-Vincent. The notable geometers educated at this school included Jean-Charles della Faille, Andr\u00e9 Tacquet, and Theodorus Moretus.\nHis book, \"Opticorum Libri Sex philosophis juxta ac mathematicis utiles,\" or \"Six Books of Optics,\" is useful for philosophers and mathematicians. It was published by Balthasar I Moretus in Antwerp in 1613 and illustrated by the famous painter Peter Paul Rubens. It included one of the first studies of binocular vision. It also gave the names we now use to stereographic projection and orthographic projection, although the projections themselves were likely known to Hipparchus. This book inspired the works of Desargues and Christiaan Huygens.\nHe died in Antwerp, aged 50.\nSix Books of Optics.\nFrancois d'Aguilon's \"Six Books of Optics\" concerns geometrical optics, which at the time in the Jesuit school was a subcategory of geometry. He taught logic, syntax, and theology while being charged with organizing the teaching of geometry and science which would be useful for geography, navigation, architecture and the military arts in Belgium. His superiors wanted him to synthesize the work of Euclid, Alhazen, Vitello, Roger Bacon and others. Although he died before completing the book, it still consists of six in-depth books, called \"Opticorum Libri Sex.\"\nPerception and the horopter.\nD'Aguilon extensively studied stereographic projection, which he wanted to use a means to aid architects, cosmographers, navigators and artists. For centuries, artists and architects had sought formal laws of projection to place objects on a screen. Aguilon's \"Opticorum libri sex\" successfully treated projections and the errors in perception. D'Aguillon adopted Alhazen's theory that only light rays orthogonal to the cornea and lens surface are clearly registered. Aguilon was the first to use the term horopter, which is the line drawn through the focal point of both eyes and parallel to the line between the eyes. In other words, it describes how only objects on the horopter are seen in their true location. He then built an instrument to measure the spacing of double images in the horopter as he saw fit.\nD'Aguilon expanded on the horopter by saying in his book: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt first glance, it seems that Aguillon discovered the geometrical horopter more than 200 years before Prevost and Vieth and Muller. The horopter was then used by architect Girard Desargues, who in 1639 published a remarkable treatise on the conic sections, emphasizing the idea of projection.\nSimilarity to other theorists.\nIn Aguilon's book there are elements of perspectivities as well as the stereographic projections of Ptolemy and Hipparchus. Unaware that Johannes Kepler had already published optical theories years before him, Aguilon decided to share his insights on geometric optics. At the age of 20, the Dutch poet Constantijn Huygens read Aguilon's and was enthralled by it. He later said that it was the best book he had ever read in geometrical optics, and he thought that Aguilon should be compared to Plato, Eudoxus and Archimedes. In fact the title of Constantijn Huygens' first publication imitated Aguilon's title (omitting letters p and c): Otiorum Libri Sex (1625).\nAccompanying art.\nIn Aguilon's book the beginning of each section had works of the Flemish Baroque painter, Peter Paul Rubens. The frontispiece at the beginning of the book shows an eagle, referring to Aguilon's name and a variety of optical and geometrical images. On either side of the title stands Mercury holding the head of Argus with a hundred eyes, and Minerva holding a shield reflecting the head of Medusa. Then, at the beginning of each of six sections are Rubens' drawings describing Aguilon's experiments, one of which is the first known picture of a photometer This is one of six experiments drawn by Rubens and shows how intensity of light varies with the square of distance from the source. The experiment was later taken up by Mersenne and another Jesuit, Claude de Chales, and eventually led to Bouguer's more famous photometer. It is evident, from the detail that he put into his drawings, how enthused Rubens was about the subject matter, perspective geometry and optical rules.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10997", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10997", "title": "Hyphanet", "text": "Peer-to-peer Internet platform for censorship-resistant communication\n \nHyphanet (until mid-2023: Freenet) is a peer-to-peer platform for censorship-resistant, anonymous communication. It uses a decentralized distributed data store to keep and deliver information, and has a suite of free software for publishing and communicating on the Web without fear of censorship.&lt;ref name=\"Peers in a Client/Server World, 2005\"&gt;Taylor, Ian J. \"From P2P to Web Services and Grids: Peers in a Client/Server World\". London: Springer, 2005.&lt;/ref&gt; Both Freenet and some of its associated tools were originally designed by Ian Clarke, who defined Freenet's goal as providing freedom of speech on the Internet with strong anonymity protection.\nThe distributed data store of Freenet is used by many third-party programs and plugins to provide microblogging and media sharing, anonymous and decentralised version tracking, blogging, a generic web of trust for decentralized spam resistance, Shoeshop for using Freenet over sneakernet, and many more.\nHistory.\nThe origin of Freenet can be traced to Ian Clarke's student project at the University of Edinburgh, which he completed as a graduation requirement in the summer of 1999. Ian Clarke's resulting unpublished report \"A distributed decentralized information storage and retrieval system\" (1999) provided foundation for the seminal paper written in collaboration with other researchers, \"Freenet: A Distributed Anonymous Information Storage and Retrieval System\" (2001). According to CiteSeer, it became one of the most frequently cited computer science articles in 2002.\nFreenet can provide anonymity on the Internet by storing small encrypted snippets of content distributed on the computers of its users and connecting only through intermediate computers which pass on requests for content and sending them back without knowing the contents of the full file. This is similar to how routers on the Internet route packets without knowing anything about files\u200d\u2014\u200aexcept Freenet has caching, a layer of strong encryption, and no reliance on centralized structures. This allows users to publish anonymously or retrieve various kinds of information.\nRelease history.\nFreenet has been under continuous development since 2000.\nFreenet 0.7, released on 8 May 2008, is a major re-write incorporating a number of fundamental changes. The most fundamental change is support for darknet operation. Version 0.7 offered two modes of operation: a mode in which it connects only to friends, and an opennet-mode in which it connects to any other Freenet user. Both modes can be run simultaneously. When a user switches to pure darknet operation, Freenet becomes very difficult to detect from the outside. The transport layer created for the darknet mode allows communication over restricted routes as commonly found in mesh networks, as long as these connections follow a small-world structure. Other modifications include switching from TCP to UDP, which allows UDP hole punching along with faster transmission of messages between peers in the network.\nFreenet 0.7.5, released on 12 June 2009, offers a variety of improvements over 0.7. These include reduced memory usage, faster insert and retrieval of content, significant improvements to the FProxy web interface used for browsing freesites, and a large number of smaller bugfixes, performance enhancements, and usability improvements. Version 0.7.5 also shipped with a new version of the Windows installer.\nAs of build 1226, released on 30 July 2009, features that have been written include significant security improvements against both attackers acting on the network and physical seizure of the computer running the node.\nAs of build 1468, released on 11 July 2015, the Freenet core stopped using the db4o database and laid the foundation for an efficient interface to the Web of Trust plugin which provides spam resistance.\nFreenet has always been free software, but until 2011 it required users to install Java. This problem was solved by making Freenet compatible with OpenJDK, a free and open source implementation of the Java Platform.\nOn 11 February 2015, Freenet received the SUMA-Award for \"protection against total surveillance\".\nFeatures and user interface.\nFreenet served as the model for the Japanese peer to peer file-sharing programs Winny, Share and Perfect Dark, but this model differs from p2p networks such as Bittorrent and emule. Freenet separates the underlying network structure and protocol from how users interact with the network; as a result, there are a variety of ways to access content on the Freenet network. The simplest is via FProxy, which is integrated with the node software and provides a web interface to content on the network. Using FProxy, a user can browse freesites (websites that use normal HTML and related tools, but whose content is stored within Freenet rather than on a traditional web server). The web interface is also used for most configuration and node management tasks. Through the use of separate applications or plugins loaded into the node software, users can interact with the network in other ways, such as forums similar to web forums or Usenet or interfaces more similar to traditional P2P \"filesharing\" interfaces.\nWhile Freenet provides an HTTP interface for browsing freesites, it is not a proxy for the World Wide Web; Freenet can be used to access only the content that has been previously inserted into the Freenet network. In this way, it is more similar to Tor's onion services than to anonymous proxy software like Tor's proxy.\nFreenet's focus lies on free speech and anonymity. Because of that, Freenet acts differently at certain points that are (directly or indirectly) related to the anonymity part. Freenet attempts to protect the anonymity of both people inserting data into the network (uploading) and those retrieving data from the network (downloading). Unlike file sharing systems, there is no need for the uploader to remain on the network after uploading a file or group of files. Instead, during the upload process, the files are broken into chunks and stored on a variety of other computers on the network. When downloading, those chunks are found and reassembled. Every node on the Freenet network contributes storage space to hold files and bandwidth that it uses to route requests from its peers.\nAs a direct result of the anonymity requirements, the node requesting content does not normally connect directly to the node that has it; instead, the request is routed across several intermediaries, none of which know which node made the request or which one had it. As a result, the total bandwidth required by the network to transfer a file is higher than in other systems, which can result in slower transfers, especially for infrequently accessed content.\nSince version 0.7, Freenet offers two different levels of security: opennet and darknet. With opennet, users connect to arbitrary other users. With darknet, users connect only to \"friends\" with whom they previously exchanged public keys, named node-references. Both modes can be used together.\nContent.\nFreenet's founders argue that true freedom of speech comes only with true anonymity and that the beneficial uses of Freenet outweigh its negative uses. Their view is that free speech, in itself, is not in contradiction with any other consideration\u2014the information is not the crime. Freenet attempts to remove the possibility of any group imposing its beliefs or values on any data. Although many states censor communications to different extents, they all share one commonality in that a body must decide what information to censor and what information to allow. What may be acceptable to one group of people may be considered offensive or even dangerous to another. In essence, the purpose of Freenet is to ensure that no one is allowed to decide what is acceptable.\nReports of Freenet's use in authoritarian nations is difficult to track due to the very nature of Freenet's goals. One group, \"Freenet China\", used to introduce the Freenet software to Chinese users starting from 2001 and distribute it within China through e-mails and on disks after the group's website was blocked by the Chinese authorities on the mainland. It was reported that in 2002 \"Freenet China\" had several thousand dedicated users. However, Freenet opennet traffic was blocked in China around the 2010s.\nTechnical design.\nThe Freenet file sharing network stores documents and allows them to be retrieved later by an associated key, as is now possible with protocols such as HTTP. The network is designed to be highly survivable. The system has no central servers and is not subject to the control of any one individual or organization, including the designers of Freenet. The codebase size is over 192,000 lines of code. Information stored on Freenet is distributed around the network and stored on several different nodes. Encryption of data and relaying of requests makes it difficult to determine who inserted content into Freenet, who requested that content, or where the content was stored. This protects the anonymity of participants, and also makes it very difficult to censor specific content. Content is stored encrypted, making it difficult for even the operator of a node to determine what is stored on that node. This provides plausible deniability; which, in combination with request relaying, means that safe harbor laws that protect service providers may also protect Freenet node operators. When asked about the topic, Freenet developers defer to the EFF discussion which says that not being able to filter anything is a safe choice.\nDistributed storage and caching of data.\nLike Winny, Share and Perfect Dark, Freenet not only transmits data between nodes but actually stores them, working as a huge distributed cache. To achieve this, each node allocates some amount of disk space to store data; this is configurable by the node operator, but is typically several GB (or more).\nFiles on Freenet are typically split into multiple small blocks, with duplicate blocks created to provide redundancy. Each block is handled independently, meaning that a single file may have parts stored on many different nodes.\nInformation flow in Freenet is different from networks like eMule or BitTorrent; in Freenet:\nTwo advantages of this design are high reliability and anonymity. Information remains available even if the publisher node goes offline, and is anonymously spread over many hosting nodes as encrypted blocks, not entire files.\nThe key disadvantage of the storage method is that no one node is responsible for any chunk of data. If a piece of data is not retrieved for some time and a node keeps getting new data, it will drop the old data sometime when its allocated disk space is fully used. In this way Freenet tends to 'forget' data which is not retrieved regularly (see also Effect).\nWhile users can insert data into the network, there is no way to delete data. Due to Freenet's anonymous nature the original publishing node or owner of any piece of data is unknown. The only way data can be removed is if users don't request it.\nNetwork.\nTypically, a host computer on the network runs the software that acts as a node, and it connects to other hosts running that same software to form a large distributed, variable-size network of peer nodes. Some nodes are end user nodes, from which documents are requested and presented to human users. Other nodes serve only to route data. All nodes communicate with each other identically \u2013 there are no dedicated \"clients\" or \"servers\". It is not possible for a node to rate another node except by its capacity to insert and fetch data associated with a key. This is unlike most other P2P networks where node administrators can employ a ratio system, where users have to share a certain amount of content before they can download.\nFreenet may also be considered a small world network.\nThe Freenet protocol is intended to be used on a network of complex topology, such as the Internet (Internet Protocol). Each node knows only about some number of other nodes that it can reach directly (its conceptual \"neighbors\"), but any node can be a neighbor to any other; no hierarchy or other structure is intended. Each message is routed through the network by passing from neighbor to neighbor until it reaches its destination. As each node passes a message to a neighbor, it does not know whether the neighbor will forward the message to another node, or is the final destination or original source of the message. This is intended to protect the anonymity of users and publishers.\nEach node maintains a data store containing documents associated with keys, and a routing table associating nodes with records of their performance in retrieving different keys.\nProtocol.\nThe Freenet protocol uses a key-based routing protocol, similar to distributed hash tables. The routing algorithm changed significantly in version 0.7. Prior to version 0.7, Freenet used a heuristic routing algorithm where each node had no fixed location, and routing was based on which node had served a key closest to the key being fetched (in version 0.3) or which is estimated to serve it faster (in version 0.5). In either case, new connections were sometimes added to downstream nodes (i.e. the node that answered the request) when requests succeeded, and old nodes were discarded in least recently used order (or something close to it). Oskar Sandberg's research (during the development of version 0.7) shows that this \"path folding\" is critical, and that a very simple routing algorithm will suffice provided there is path folding.\nThe disadvantage of this is that it is very easy for an attacker to find Freenet nodes, and connect to them, because every node is continually attempting to find new connections. In version 0.7, Freenet supports both \"opennet\" (similar to the old algorithms, but simpler), and \"darknet\" (all node connections are set up manually, so only your friends know your node's IP address). Darknet is less convenient, but much more secure against a distant attacker.\nThis change required major changes in the routing algorithm. Every node has a location, which is a number between 0 and 1. When a key is requested, first the node checks the local data store. If it's not found, the key's hash is turned into another number in the same range, and the request is routed to the node whose location is closest to the key. This goes on until some number of hops is exceeded, there are no more nodes to search, or the data is found. If the data is found, it is cached on each node along the path. So there is no one source node for a key, and attempting to find where it is currently stored will result in it being cached more widely. Essentially the same process is used to insert a document into the network: the data is routed according to the key until it runs out of hops, and if no existing document is found with the same key, it is stored on each node. If older data is found, the older data is propagated and returned to the originator, and the insert \"collides\".\nBut this works only if the locations are clustered in the right way. Freenet assumes that the darknet (a subset of the global social network) is a small-world network, and nodes constantly attempt to swap locations (using the Metropolis\u2013Hastings algorithm) in order to minimize their distance to their neighbors. If the network actually is a small-world network, Freenet should find data reasonably quickly; ideally on the order of formula_1 hops in big O notation. However, it does not guarantee that data will be found at all.\nEventually, either the document is found or the hop limit is exceeded. The terminal node sends a reply that makes its way back to the originator along the route specified by the intermediate nodes' records of pending requests. The intermediate nodes may choose to cache the document along the way. Besides saving bandwidth, this also makes documents harder to censor as there is no one \"source node\".\nEffect.\nInitially, the locations in darknet are distributed randomly. This means that routing of requests is essentially random. In opennet connections are established by a join request which provides an optimized network structure if the existing network is already optimized. So the data in a newly started Freenet will be distributed somewhat randomly.\nAs location swapping (on darknet) and path folding (on opennet) progress, nodes which are close to one another will increasingly have close locations, and nodes which are far away will have distant locations. Data with similar keys will be stored on the same node.\nThe result is that the network will self-organize into a distributed, clustered structure where nodes tend to hold data items that are close together in key space. There will probably be multiple such clusters throughout the network, any given document being replicated numerous times, depending on how much it is used. This is a kind of \"spontaneous symmetry breaking\", in which an initially symmetric state (all nodes being the same, with random initial keys for each other) leads to a highly asymmetric situation, with nodes coming to specialize in data that has closely related keys.\nThere are forces which tend to cause clustering (shared closeness data spreads throughout the network), and forces that tend to break up clusters (local caching of commonly used data). These forces will be different depending on how often data is used, so that seldom-used data will tend to be on just a few nodes which specialize in providing that data, and frequently used items will be spread widely throughout the network. This automatic mirroring counteracts the times when web traffic becomes overloaded, and due to a mature network's intelligent routing, a network of size \"n\" should require only log(\"n\") time to retrieve a document on average.\nKeys.\nKeys are hashes: there is no notion of semantic closeness when speaking of key closeness. Therefore, there will be no correlation between key closeness and similar popularity of data as there might be if keys did exhibit some semantic meaning, thus avoiding bottlenecks caused by popular subjects.\nThere are two main varieties of keys in use on Freenet, the Content Hash Key (CHK) and the Signed Subspace Key (SSK). A subtype of SSKs is the Updatable Subspace Key (USK) which adds versioning to allow secure updating of content.\nA CHK is a SHA-256 hash of a document (after encryption, which itself depends on the hash of the plaintext) and thus a node can check that the document returned is correct by hashing it and checking the digest against the key. This key contains the meat of the data on Freenet. It carries all the binary data building blocks for the content to be delivered to the client for reassembly and decryption. The CHK is unique by nature and provides tamperproof content. A hostile node altering the data under a CHK will immediately be detected by the next node or the client. CHKs also reduce the redundancy of data since the same data will have the same CHK and when multiple sites reference the same large files, they can reference to the same CHK.\nSSKs are based on public-key cryptography. Currently Freenet uses the DSA algorithm. Documents inserted under SSKs are signed by the inserter, and this signature can be verified by every node to ensure that the data is not tampered with. SSKs can be used to establish a verifiable pseudonymous identity on Freenet, and allow for multiple documents to be inserted securely by a single person. Files inserted with an SSK are effectively immutable, since inserting a second file with the same name can cause collisions. USKs resolve this by adding a version number to the keys which is also used for providing update notification for keys registered as bookmarks in the web interface. Another subtype of the SSK is the Keyword Signed Key, or KSK, in which the key pair is generated in a standard way from a simple human-readable string. Inserting a document using a KSK allows the document to be retrieved and decrypted if and only if the requester knows the human-readable string; this allows for more convenient (but less secure) URIs for users to refer to.\nScalability.\nA network is said to be scalable if its performance does not deteriorate even if the network is very large. The scalability of Freenet is being evaluated, but similar architectures have been shown to scale logarithmically. This work indicates that Freenet can find data in formula_2 hops on a small-world network (which includes both opennet and darknet style Freenet networks), when ignoring the caching which could improve the scalability for popular content. However, this scalability is difficult to test without a very large network. Furthermore, the security features inherent to Freenet make detailed performance analysis (including things as simple as determining the size of the network) difficult to do accurately. As of now, the scalability of Freenet has yet to be tested.\nDarknet versus opennet.\nAs of version 0.7, Freenet supports both \"darknet\" and \"opennet\" connections. Opennet connections are made automatically by nodes with opennet enabled, while darknet connections are manually established between users that know and trust each other. Freenet developers describe the trust needed as \"will not crack their Freenet node\". Opennet connections are easy to use, but darknet connections are more secure against attackers on the network, and can make it difficult for an attacker (such as an oppressive government) to even determine that a user is running Freenet in the first place.\nThe core innovation in Freenet 0.7 is to allow a globally scalable darknet, capable (at least in theory) of supporting millions of users. Previous darknets, such as WASTE, have been limited to relatively small disconnected networks. The scalability of Freenet is made possible by the fact that human relationships tend to form small-world networks, a property that can be exploited to find short paths between any two people. The work is based on a speech given at DEF CON 13 by Ian Clarke and Swedish mathematician Oskar Sandberg. Furthermore, the routing algorithm is capable of routing over a mixture of opennet and darknet connections, allowing people who have only a few friends using the network to get the performance from having sufficient connections while still receiving some of the security benefits of darknet connections. This also means that small darknets where some users also have opennet connections are fully integrated into the whole Freenet network, allowing all users access to all content, whether they run opennet, darknet, or a hybrid of the two, except for darknet pockets connected only by a single hybrid node.\nTools and applications.\nUnlike many other P2P applications Freenet does not provide comprehensive functionality itself. Freenet is modular and features an API called Freenet Client Protocol (FCP) for other programs to use to implement services such as message boards, file sharing, or online chat.\nCommunication.\nFreenet Messaging System (FMS)\nFMS was designed to address problems with Frost such as denial of service attacks and spam. Users publish trust lists, and each user downloads messages only from identities they trust and identities trusted by identities they trust. FMS is developed anonymously and can be downloaded from \"the FMS freesite\" within Freenet. It does not have an official site on the normal Internet. It features random post delay, support for many identities, and a distinction between trusting a user's posts and trusting their trust list. It is written in C++ and is a separate application from Freenet which uses the Freenet Client Protocol (FCP) to interface with Freenet.\nFrost\nFrost includes support for convenient file sharing, but its design is inherently vulnerable to spam and denial of service attacks. Frost can be downloaded from the Frost home page on SourceForge, or from \"the Frost freesite\" within Freenet. It is not endorsed by the Freenet developers. Frost is written in Java and is a separate application from Freenet.\nSone\nSone provides a simpler interface inspired by Facebook with public anonymous discussions and image galleries. It provides an API for control from other programs is also used to implement a comment system for static websites in the regular internet.\nUtilities.\njSite\njSite is a tool to upload websites. It handles keys and manages uploading files.\nInfocalypse\nInfocalypse is an extension for the distributed revision control system Mercurial. It uses an optimized structure to minimize the number of requests to retrieve new data, and allows supporting a repository by securely reuploading most parts of the data without requiring the owner's private keys.\nLibraries.\nFCPLib\nFCPLib (Freenet Client Protocol Library) aims to be a cross-platform natively compiled set of C++-based functions for storing and retrieving information to and from Freenet. FCPLib supports Windows NT/2K/XP, Debian, BSD, Solaris, and macOS.\nlib-pyFreenet\nlib-pyFreenet exposes Freenet functionality to Python programs. Infocalypse uses it.\nVulnerabilities.\nHTL Attack Controversy.\nIn 2011, an officer at an ICAC taskforce in Missouri attempted to use what they believed was a vulnerability in the Hops-To-Live feature in Hyphanet. When a node makes a request, it specifies a number formula_3, where formula_3 is the amount of different times the request for information can be bounced through the network to other nodes. The ICAC falsely assumed that the HTL decreases similar to a counter, where the node next in line performs formula_5 on the counter indiscriminately, when in actuality, the node next in line has a 50% chance of subtracting the current count by one or not, a strategy specifically implemented to avoid that exact attack that was present in Hyphanet since 2008.\nIn a separate paper in 2017, Levine et al. claimed to have found a similar probabilistic method relying on the HTL counter. The Hyphanet maintainer at the time criticized the paper, claiming that it made the same critical misassumption regarding the hop counter behavior, and had also used false math that relied on overly-optimistic conditions in both the 2017 paper and another one released in 2020.\nBrian Levine has developed other pieces of software such as \"Torrential Downpour\" (law enforcement tool for BitTorrents), which have been similarly criticized as potentially outputting false information, as individuals who were searched with evidence from \"Torrential Downpour\" often did not have any evidence of downloaded or logs of viewed illicit material, nor any evidence that they actually even used BitTorrent software.\nVulnerability Court Cases.\nCanada.\nAn agent from the Peel Regional Police attempted to use the original ICAC vulnerability on a defendant in a child sexual exploitation material investigation by filing a search warrant for an IP he claimed was requesting a known video of sexual abuse of a child. During the trial, the defendant had argued that both the surveillance on Hyphanet and the subsequent subpoena of his IP were unsound. After details regarding the attack were disclosed to the judge by the constable, the judge ruled that the officer overplayed the power of the attack and omitted information regarding key caveats about the attack that prevented the original judge from making an informed decision, which was considered a violation of the right to full disclosure, though the judge only dismissed the rest of the evidence from being used due to semi-unrelated issues with the IP address subpoena to TekSavvy, arguing that because the officer testified that he was advised that the caveats in the methodology were privileged information by a legal team, and that there was little proof of the false evidence having been used purposeful in bad-faith, the Hyphanet attack by itself did not classify as a purposeful, egregious, or overly intrusive abuse of the legal system that is needed for evidence to be dismissed in Canada.\nUnited States.\nThe ICAC used its method to file search warrants across the United States.\nBrian Levine, since his 2017 paper, has advertised his services to law enforcement in the United States, despite criticism regarding methodology, with a 2022 appeal revealing that Levine and other unnamed researchers regularly distributed software that was advertised under the name \"Freenet Roundup\", as part of a greater brand of law enforcement software called \"RoundUp\", which was targeted towards P2P networks.\nThe United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in Missouri in 2020 ruled that the Levine method used in a case was illegitimate as they decided that it could not differentiate between an active requester and a passive node, but that due to the fact that the authorities in that instance did not knowingly use the method in bad-faith, and that there was no proof of an explicitly abusive process involved within the signing of the original search warrant for evidence, the evidence against the accused was not dismissed.\nNotability.\nFreenet has had significant publicity in the mainstream press, including articles in \"The New York Times\", and coverage on CNN, \"60 Minutes II\", the BBC, \"The Guardian\", and elsewhere.\nFreenet received the SUMA-Award 2014 for \"protection against total surveillance\".\nFreesite.\nA \"freesite\" is a site hosted on the Freenet network. Because it contains only static content, it cannot contain any active content like server-side scripts or databases. Freesites are coded in HTML and support as many features as the browser viewing the page allows; however, there are some exceptions where the Freenet software will remove parts of the code that may be used to reveal the identity of the person viewing the page (making a page access something on the internet, for example).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10998", "revid": "8723708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10998", "title": "Fortified wine", "text": "Wine with an added distilled beverage\nFortified wine is a wine to which a distilled spirit, usually brandy, has been added. In the course of some centuries, winemakers have developed many different styles of fortified wine, including port, sherry, madeira, Marsala, Commandaria wine, and the aromatised wine vermouth.\nProduction.\nOne reason for fortifying wine was to preserve it, since ethanol is also a natural antiseptic. Even though other preservation methods now exist, fortification continues to be used because the process can add distinct flavors to the finished product.\nAlthough grape brandy is most commonly added to produce fortified wines, the additional alcohol may also be neutral spirit that has been made from grapes, grain, sugar beets or sugarcane. Regional appellation laws may dictate the types of spirit that are permitted for fortification. For example, in the U.S. only spirits made from the same fruit as the wine may be added.\nThe source of the additional alcohol and the method of its distillation can affect the flavour of the fortified wine. If neutral spirit is used, it is usually produced with a continuous still, rather than a pot still.\nWhen added to wine before the fermentation process is complete, the alcohol in the distilled beverage kills the yeast and leaves residual sugar behind. The result is a wine that is both sweeter and stronger, normally containing about 20% alcohol by volume (ABV).\nDuring the fermentation process, yeast cells in the \"must\" continue to convert sugar into alcohol until the must reaches an alcohol level of 16\u201318%. At this level, the alcohol becomes toxic to the yeast and stalls its metabolism. If fermentation is allowed to run to completion, the resulting wine is (in most cases) low in sugar and is considered a dry wine. Adding alcohol earlier in the fermentation process results in a sweeter wine. For drier fortified wine styles, such as sherry, the alcohol is added shortly before or after the end of the fermentation.\nIn the case of some fortified wine styles (such as late harvest and botrytized wines), a naturally high level of sugar inhibits the yeast and the rising alcohol content as the high sugar level kills the yeast. This causes fermentation to stop before the wine can become dry.\nVarieties.\nCommandaria wine.\nCommandaria is made in Cyprus' unique AOC region north of Limassol from high-altitude vines of Mavro and Xynisteri, sun-dried and aged in oak barrels. Recent developments have produced different styles of Commandaria, some of which are not fortified.\nMadeira wine.\nMadeira is a fortified wine made in the Madeira Islands. The wine is produced in a variety of styles ranging from dry wines which can be consumed on their own as an aperitif, to sweet wines more usually consumed with dessert. Madeira is deliberately heated and oxidised as part of its maturation process, resulting in distinctive flavours and an unusually long lifespan once a bottle is opened.\nMarsala wine.\nMarsala wine is a wine from Sicily that is available in both fortified and unfortified versions. It was first produced in 1772 by an English merchant, John Woodhouse, as an inexpensive substitute for sherry and port, and gets its name from the island's port, Marsala. The fortified version is blended with brandy to make two styles, the younger, slightly weaker \"Fine\", which is at least 17% abv and aged at least four months; and the \"Superiore\", which is at least 18%, and aged at least two years. The unfortified Marsala wine is aged in wooden casks for five years or more and reaches a strength of 18% by evaporation.\nMistelle.\nMistelle (; ; Spanish, Portuguese, Galician and , from Latin mixtella/mixtvm \"mix\") is sometimes used as an ingredient in fortified wines, particularly Vermouth, Marsala and Sherry, though it is used mainly as a base for ap\u00e9ritifs such as the French Pineau des Charentes. It is produced by adding alcohol to non-fermented or partially fermented grape juice (or apple juice to make pommeau). The addition of alcohol stops the fermentation and, as a consequence Mistelle is sweeter than fully fermented grape juice in which the sugars turn to alcohol.\nMoscatel de Set\u00fabal.\nMoscatel de Set\u00fabal is a Portuguese wine produced around the Set\u00fabal Municipality on the Pen\u00ednsula de Set\u00fabal. The wine is made primarily from the Muscat of Alexandria grape and is typically fortified with aguardente. The style was believed to have been invented by Jos\u00e9 Maria da Fonseca, the founder of the oldest table wine company in Portugal dating back to 1834.\nPort wine.\nPort wine (also known simply as port) is a fortified wine from the Douro Valley in the northern provinces of Portugal. It is typically a sweet red wine, but also comes in dry, semi-dry and white or ros\u00e9 styles.\nSherry.\nSherry is a fortified wine made from white grapes that are grown near the town of Jerez, Spain. The word \"sherry\" itself is an anglicisation of Jerez. In earlier times, sherry was known as \"sack\" (from the Spanish \"saca\", meaning \"a removal from the solera\"). In the European Union \"sherry\" is a protected designation of origin; therefore, all wine labelled as \"sherry\" must legally come from the Sherry Triangle, which is an area in the province of C\u00e1diz between Jerez de la Frontera, Sanl\u00facar de Barrameda and El Puerto de Santa Mar\u00eda.\nAfter fermentation is complete, sherry is fortified with brandy. Because the fortification takes place after fermentation, most sherries are initially dry, with any sweetness being added later. In contrast, port wine (for example) is fortified halfway through its fermentation, which stops the process so that not all of the sugar is turned into alcohol.\nSherry is produced in a variety of styles, ranging from dry, light versions such as finos to much darker and sometimes sweeter versions known as olorosos. Cream sherry is always sweet.\nVermouth.\nVermouth is a fortified wine flavoured with aromatic herbs and spices (\"aromatised\" in the trade) using closely guarded recipes (trade secrets). Some of the herbs and spices used may include cardamom, cinnamon, marjoram, and chamomile. Some vermouth is sweetened. Unsweetened or dry vermouth tends to be bitter. The person credited with the second vermouth recipe, Antonio Benedetto Carpano from Turin, Italy, chose to name his concoction \"vermouth\" in 1786 because he was inspired by a German wine flavoured with wormwood, an herb most famously used in distilling absinthe. Wine flavoured with wormwood goes back to ancient Rome. The modern German word \"Wermut\" (\"Wermuth\" in the spelling of Carpano's time) means both \"wormwood\" and \"vermouth\". The herbs were originally used to mask raw flavours of cheaper wines, imparting a slightly medicinal \"tonic\" flavor.\nVins doux naturels.\nVins doux naturels (VDN) are lightly fortified wines typically made from white Muscat grapes or red Grenache grapes in the south of France. As the name suggests, Muscat de Beaumes-de-Venise, Muscat de Rivesaltes and Muscat de Frontignan are all made from the white Muscat grape, whilst Banyuls and Maury are made from red Grenache. Other wines, like those of Rivesaltes AOC, can be made from red or white grapes. Regardless of the grape, fermentation is stopped by the addition of up to 10% of a 190 proof (95% abv) grape spirit. The Grenache vins doux naturels can be made in an oxidised or unoxidised style whereas the Muscat wines are protected from oxidation to retain their freshness.\nVins de liqueur.\nA vin de liqueur is a sweet fortified style of French wine that is fortified by adding brandy to unfermented grape must. The term vin de liqueur is also used by the European Union to refer to all fortified wines. Vins de liqueur take greater flavour from the added brandy but are also sweeter than vin doux.\nExamples include Floc de Gascogne which is made using 1/3 armagnac to 2/3 grape juice from the same vineyard, Pineau des Charentes in the Cognac zone, Macvin in Jura; there is also Pommeau similarly made by blending apple juice and apple brandy.\nLow-end fortified wines.\nInexpensive fortified wines became popular during the Great Depression for their relatively high alcohol content. The term \"wino\" was coined during this period to describe impoverished alcoholics of the time.\nThese wines continue to be associated with the homeless, mainly because marketers have been aggressive in targeting low-income communities as ideal consumers of these beverages; organisations in cities such as Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle, and Portland have urged makers of inexpensive fortified wine, including E &amp; J Gallo Winery to stop heavily marketing such products to liquor stores in impoverished areas. In 2005, the Seattle City Council asked the Washington State Liquor Control Board to prohibit the sale of certain alcohol products in an impoverished \"Alcohol Impact Area.\" Among the products sought to be banned were over two dozen beers, and six fortified wines: Cisco, Gino's Premium Blend, MD 20/20, Night Train Express, Thunderbird, and Wild Irish Rose. The Liquor Control Board approved these restrictions on 30 August 2006.\nGwaha-ju.\n\"Gwaha-ju\" is a fortified rice wine made in Korea.\nAlthough rice wine is not made from grapes, it has a similar alcohol content to grape wine, and the addition of the distilled spirit, soju, and other ingredients like ginseng, jujubes, ginger, etc., to the rice wine, bears similarity to the above-mentioned fortified wines.\nTerminology.\nFortified wines are often termed dessert wines in the United States to avoid association with hard drinking. The term \"vins de liqueur\" is used by the French.\nUnder European Union legislation, a liqueur wine is a fortified wine that contains 15\u201322% abv, with Total Alcoholic Strength of no less than 17.5%, and that meets many additional criteria. Exemptions are allowed for certain quality liqueur wines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11001", "revid": "1315652306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11001", "title": "Fred Hoyle", "text": "English astronomer (1915\u20132001)\nSir Fred Hoyle (24 June 1915\u00a0\u2013 20 August 2001) was an English astronomer who formulated the theory of stellar nucleosynthesis and was one of the authors of the influential B2FH paper. \nHe held controversial views on some scientific matters \u2014 in particular, in his rejection of the \"Big Bang\" theory (a term he allegedly jokingly coined on BBC Radio but later denied doing so in derision) in favour of a \"steady-state model\", and his promotion of panspermia as the origin of life on Earth. \nHe spent most of his working life at St John's College, Cambridge, and served as the founding director of the Institute of Theoretical Astronomy at Cambridge.\nHoyle also wrote science fiction novels, short stories, and radio plays, co-created television serials, and co-authored twelve books with his son, Geoffrey Hoyle.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nHoyle was born near Bingley in Gilstead, West Riding of Yorkshire, England. His father Ben Hoyle was a violinist and worked in the wool trade in Bradford, and served as a machine gunner in the First World War. His mother, Mabel Pickard, had studied music at the Royal College of Music in London and later worked as a cinema pianist. Hoyle was educated at Bingley Grammar School and read mathematics at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. As a youth, he sang in the choir at the local Anglican church.\nIn 1936, Hoyle shared the Mayhew Prize with George Stanley Rushbrooke.\nCareer.\nIn late 1940, Hoyle left Cambridge to go to Portsmouth to work for the Admiralty on radar research, for example devising a method to get the altitude of incoming aeroplanes. He was also put in charge of countermeasures against the radar-guided guns found on the \"Graf Spee\" after its scuttling in the River Plate. Britain's radar project was a large-scale operation, and was probably the inspiration for the large British project in Hoyle's novel \"The Black Cloud\". Two colleagues in this war work were Hermann Bondi and Thomas Gold, and the three had many discussions on cosmology. The radar work involved several trips to North America, where he took the opportunity to visit astronomers. On one trip to the US, he learned about supernovae at Caltech and Mount Palomar and, in Canada, the nuclear physics of plutonium implosion and explosion, noticed some similarity between the two and started thinking about supernova nucleosynthesis. He had an intuition at the time \"I will make a name for myself if this works out\" (he published his prescient and groundbreaking paper in 1954). He also formed a group at Cambridge exploring stellar nucleosynthesis in ordinary stars and was bothered by the paucity of stellar carbon production in existing models. He noticed that one existing process would be made a billion times more productive if the carbon-12 nucleus had a resonance at 7.7 MeV, but nuclear physicists at the time omitted such an observed value. On another trip, he visited the nuclear physics group at Caltech, spent a few months of sabbatical there and persuaded them against their scepticism to find the Hoyle state in carbon-12, from which a full theory of stellar nucleosynthesis was developed, co-authored by Hoyle and members of the Caltech group.\nIn 1945, after the war ended, Hoyle returned to Cambridge University as a lecturer at St John's College, Cambridge (where he had been a Fellow since 1939). Hoyle's Cambridge years, 1945\u20131973, saw him rise to the top of world astrophysics theory, on the basis of a startling originality of ideas covering a wide range of topics. In 1958, Hoyle was appointed Plumian Professor of Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy in Cambridge University. In 1967, he became the founding director of the Institute of Theoretical Astronomy (subsequently renamed the Institute of Astronomy, Cambridge), where his innovative leadership quickly led to this institution becoming one of the premier groups in the world for theoretical astrophysics. In 1971, he was invited to deliver the MacMillan Memorial Lecture to the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland. He chose the subject \"Astronomical Instruments and their Construction\". Hoyle was knighted in the 1972 New Year Honours.\nAlthough the occupant of two distinguished offices, by 1972 Hoyle had become unhappy with his life in Cambridge. A dispute over election to a professorial chair led to Hoyle resigning as Plumian professor in 1972. The following year he also resigned the directorship of the institute. Explaining his actions, he later wrote: \"I do not see any sense in continuing to skirmish on a battlefield where I can never hope to win. The Cambridge system is effectively designed to prevent one ever establishing a directed policy - key decisions can be upset by ill-informed and politically motivated committees. To be effective in this system one must for ever be watching one's colleagues, almost like a Robespierre spy system. If one does so, then of course little time is left for any real science.\"\nAfter leaving Cambridge, Hoyle wrote several popular science and science fiction books, as well as presenting lectures around the world, partly to provide a means of support. Hoyle was still a member of the joint policy committee (since 1967), during the planning stage for the 150-inch Anglo-Australian Telescope at Siding Spring Observatory in New South Wales. He became chairman of the Anglo-Australian Telescope board in 1973, and presided at its inauguration in 1974 by Charles, Prince of Wales.\nDecline and death.\nAfter his resignation from Cambridge in 1972, Hoyle moved to the Lake District and occupied his time with treks across the moors, writing books, visiting research centres around the world, and working on science ideas (that have been largely rejected); the topics he wrote about include \"Stonehenge, panspermia, Darwinism, paleontology, and viruses from space\". On 24 November 1997, while hiking across moorlands in west Yorkshire, near his childhood home in Gilstead, Hoyle fell into a steep ravine called Shipley Glen. He was located about 12 hours later by a party using search dogs. He was hospitalised for two months with a broken shoulder bone. In 2001, he suffered a series of strokes and died in Bournemouth on 20 August of that year.\nViews and contributions.\nOrigin of nucleosynthesis.\nHoyle authored the first two research papers ever published on synthesis of chemical elements heavier than helium by stellar nuclear reactions. The first of these in 1946 showed that cores of stars will evolve to temperatures of billions of degrees, much hotter than temperatures considered for thermonuclear origin of stellar power in main-sequence stars. Hoyle showed that at such high temperatures the element iron can become much more abundant than other heavy elements owing to thermal equilibrium among nuclear particles, explaining the high natural abundance of iron. This idea would later be called the \"e\"Process. Hoyle's second foundational nucleosynthesis publication, published in 1954, showed that the elements between carbon and iron cannot be synthesised by such equilibrium processes. He attributed those elements to specific nuclear fusion reactions between abundant constituents in concentric shells of evolved massive, pre-supernova stars. This startlingly modern picture is the accepted paradigm today for the supernova nucleosynthesis of these primary elements. In the mid-1950s, Hoyle became the leader of a group of talented experimental and theoretical physicists who met in Cambridge: William Alfred Fowler, Margaret Burbidge, and Geoffrey Burbidge. This group systematised basic ideas of how all the chemical elements in our universe were created, with this now being a field called nucleosynthesis. Famously, in 1957, this group produced the B2FH paper (known for the initials of the four authors) in which the field of nucleosynthesis was organised into complementary nuclear processes. They added much new material on the synthesis of heavy elements by neutron-capture reactions, the so-called s process and the r process. So influential did the B2FH paper become that for the remainder of the twentieth century it became the default citation of almost all researchers wishing to cite an accepted origin for nucleosynthesis theory, and as a result, the path-breaking Hoyle 1954 paper fell into obscurity. Historical research in the 21st century has brought Hoyle's 1954 paper back to scientific prominence. Those historical arguments were first presented to a gathering of nucleosynthesis experts attending a 2007 conference at Caltech organised after the deaths of both Fowler and Hoyle to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the publication of B2FH. Ironically the B2FH paper did not review Hoyle's 1954 supernova-shells attribution of the origin of elements between silicon and iron despite Hoyle's co-authorship of B2FH. Based on his many personal discussions with Hoyle Donald D. Clayton has attributed this seemingly inexplicable oversight in B2FH to the lack of proofreading by Hoyle of the draft composed at Caltech in 1956 by G.\u00a0R. Burbidge and E.\u00a0M. Burbidge.\nThe second of Hoyle's nucleosynthesis papers also introduced an interesting use of the anthropic principle, which was not then known by that name. In trying to work out the steps of stellar nucleosynthesis, Hoyle calculated that one particular nuclear reaction, the triple-alpha process, which generates carbon from helium, would require the carbon nucleus to have a very specific resonance energy and spin for it to work. The large amount of carbon in the universe, which makes it possible for carbon-based life-forms of any kind to exist, demonstrated to Hoyle that this nuclear reaction must work. Based on this notion, Hoyle therefore predicted the values of the energy, the nuclear spin and the parity of the compound state in the carbon nucleus formed by three alpha particles (helium nuclei), which was later borne out by experiment.\nThis energy level, while needed to produce carbon in large quantities, was statistically very unlikely to fall where it does in the scheme of carbon energy levels. Hoyle later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Would you not say to yourself, \"Some super-calculating intellect must have designed the properties of the carbon atom, otherwise the chance of my finding such an atom through the blind forces of nature would be utterly minuscule. A common sense interpretation of the facts suggests that a superintellect has monkeyed with physics, as well as with chemistry and biology, and that there are no blind forces worth speaking about in nature. The numbers one calculates from the facts seem to me so overwhelming as to put this conclusion almost beyond question.\"\u2014\u200a\nHis co-worker William Alfred Fowler eventually won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1983 (with Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar), but Hoyle's original contribution was overlooked by the electors, and many were surprised that such a notable astronomer missed out. Fowler himself in an autobiographical sketch affirmed Hoyle's pioneering efforts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The concept of nucleosynthesis in stars was first established by Hoyle in 1946. This provided a way to explain the existence of elements heavier than helium in the universe, basically by showing that critical elements such as carbon could be generated in stars and then incorporated in other stars and planets when that star \"dies\". The new stars formed now start off with these heavier elements and even heavier elements are formed from them. Hoyle theorized that other rarer elements could be explained by supernovas, the giant explosions which occasionally occur throughout the universe, whose temperatures and pressures would be required to create such elements.\u2014\u200a\nRejection of the Big Bang.\nWhile having no argument with the Lema\u00eetre theory (later confirmed by Edwin Hubble's observations) that the universe was expanding, Hoyle disagreed on its interpretation. He found the idea that the universe had a beginning to be pseudoscience, resembling arguments for a creator, \"for it's an irrational process, and can't be described in scientific terms\" (see Kalam cosmological argument). Instead, Hoyle, along with Thomas Gold and Hermann Bondi (with whom he had worked on radar in the Second World War), in 1948 began to argue for the universe as being in a \"steady state\" and formulated their Steady State theory. The theory tried to explain how the universe could be eternal and essentially unchanging while still having the galaxies we observe moving away from each other. The theory hinged on the creation of matter between galaxies over time, so that even though galaxies get further apart, new ones that develop between them fill the space they leave. The resulting universe is in a \"steady state\" in the same manner that a flowing river is\u2014the individual water molecules are moving away but the overall river remains the same.\nThe theory was one alternative to the Big Bang which, like the Big Bang, agreed with key observations of the day, namely Hubble's red shift observations, and Hoyle was a strong critic of the Big Bang. He coined the term \"Big Bang\" on BBC radio's \"Third Programme\" broadcast on 28 March 1949. It was said by George Gamow and his opponents that Hoyle intended to be pejorative, and the script from which he read aloud was interpreted by his opponents to be \"vain, one-sided, insulting, not worthy of the BBC\". Hoyle explicitly denied that he was being insulting and said it was just a striking image meant to emphasise the difference between the two theories for the radio audience. In another BBC interview, he said, \"The reason why scientists like the \"Big Bang\" is because they are overshadowed by the Book of Genesis. It is deep within the psyche of most scientists to believe in the first page of Genesis\".\nHoyle had a famously heated argument with Martin Ryle of the Cavendish Radio Astronomy Group about Hoyle's steady state theory, which somewhat restricted collaboration between the Cavendish group and the Cambridge Institute of Astronomy during the 1960s.\nHoyle, unlike Gold and Bondi, offered an explanation for the appearance of new matter by postulating the existence of what he dubbed the \"creation field\", or just the \"C-field\", which had negative pressure in order to be consistent with the conservation of energy and drive the expansion of the universe. This C-field is the same as the later \"de Sitter solution\" for cosmic inflation, but the C-field model acts much slower than the de Sitter inflation model. They jointly argued that continuous creation was no more inexplicable than the appearance of the entire universe from nothing, although it had to be done on a regular basis. In the end, mounting observational evidence convinced most cosmologists that the steady-state model was incorrect and that the Big Bang theory agreed better with observations, although Hoyle continued to support and develop his theory. In 1993, in an attempt to explain some of the evidence against the steady-state theory, he presented a modified version called \"quasi-steady state cosmology\" (QSS), but the theory is not widely accepted.\nThe evidence that resulted in the Big Bang's victory over the steady-state model included discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation in the 1960s, and the distribution of \"young galaxies\" and quasars throughout the Universe in the 1980s indicate a more consistent age estimate of the universe. Hoyle died in 2001 having never accepted the validity of the Big Bang theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How, in the big-bang cosmology, is the microwave background explained? Despite what supporters of big-bang cosmology claim, it is not explained. The supposed explanation is nothing but an entry in the gardener's catalogue of hypothesis that constitutes the theory. Had observation given 27 Kelvins instead of 2.7 Kelvins for the temperature, then 27 kelvins would have been entered in the catalogue. Or 0.27 Kelvins. Or anything at all.\u2014\u200a\nTheory of gravity.\nTogether with Narlikar, Hoyle developed a particle theory in the 1960s, the Hoyle\u2013Narlikar theory of gravity. It made predictions that were roughly the same as Einstein's general relativity, but it incorporated Mach's Principle, which Einstein had tried but failed to incorporate in his theory. The Hoyle-Narlikar theory fails several tests, including consistency with the microwave background. It was motivated by their belief in the steady-state model of the universe.\nRejection of Earth-based abiogenesis.\nIn his later years, Hoyle became a staunch critic of theories of abiogenesis to explain the origin of life on Earth. With Chandra Wickramasinghe, Hoyle promoted the hypothesis that the first life on Earth began in space, spreading through the universe via panspermia, and that evolution on Earth is influenced by a steady influx of viruses arriving via comets. His belief that comets had a significant percentage of organic compounds was well ahead of his time, as the dominant views in the 1970s and 1980s were that comets largely consisted of water-ice, and the presence of organic compounds was then highly controversial. Wickramasinghe wrote in 2003: \"In the highly polarized polemic between Darwinism and creationism, our position is unique. Although we do not align ourselves with either side, both sides treat us as opponents. Thus we are outsiders with an unusual perspective\u2014and our suggestion for a way out of the crisis has not yet been considered.\"\nHoyle and Wickramasinghe advanced several instances where they say outbreaks of illnesses on Earth are of extraterrestrial origins, including the 1918 flu pandemic, and certain outbreaks of polio and mad cow disease. For the 1918 flu pandemic, they hypothesized that cometary dust brought the virus to Earth simultaneously at multiple locations\u2014a view almost universally dismissed by experts on this pandemic. In 1982, Hoyle presented \"Evolution from Space\" for the Royal Institution's Omni Lecture. After considering what he thought of as a very remote possibility of Earth-based abiogenesis he concluded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If one proceeds directly and straightforwardly in this matter, without being deflected by a fear of incurring the wrath of scientific opinion, one arrives at the conclusion that biomaterials with their amazing measure of order must be the outcome of intelligent design. No other possibility I have been able to think of... \u2014\u200a\nPublished in his 1982/1984 books \"Evolution from Space\" (co-authored with Chandra Wickramasinghe), Hoyle calculated that the chance of obtaining the required set of enzymes for even the simplest living cell without panspermia was one in 1040,000. Since the number of atoms in the known universe is infinitesimally tiny by comparison (1080), he argued that Earth as life's place of origin could be ruled out. He claimed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The notion that not only the biopolymer but the operating program of a living cell could be arrived at by chance in a primordial organic soup here on the Earth is evidently nonsense of a high order.\nThough Hoyle declared himself an atheist, this apparent suggestion of a guiding hand led him to the conclusion that \"a superintellect has monkeyed with physics, as well as with chemistry and biology, and ... there are no blind forces worth speaking about in nature.\" He would go on to compare the random emergence of even the simplest cell without panspermia to the likelihood that \"a tornado sweeping through a junk-yard might assemble a Boeing 747 from the materials therein\" and to compare the chance of obtaining even a single functioning protein by chance combination of amino acids to a solar system full of blind men solving Rubik's Cubes simultaneously. This is known as \"the junkyard tornado\", or \"Hoyle's Fallacy\". Those who advocate the intelligent design (ID) philosophy sometimes cite Hoyle's work in this area to support the claim that the universe was fine tuned to allow intelligent life to be possible.\nOther opinions.\nWhile Hoyle was well-regarded for his works on nucleosynthesis and science popularisation, he held positions on a wide range of scientific issues that were in direct opposition to the prevailing theories of the scientific community. Paul Davies describes how he \"loved his maverick personality and contempt for orthodoxy\", quoting Hoyle as saying \"I don't care what they think\" about his theories on discrepant redshift, and \"it is better to be interesting and wrong than boring and right\".\nHoyle often expressed anger against the labyrinthine and petty politics at Cambridge and frequently feuded with members and institutions of all levels of the British astronomy community, leading to his resignation from Cambridge in September 1971 over the way he thought Donald Lynden-Bell was chosen to replace retiring professor Roderick Oliver Redman behind his back. According to biographer Simon Mitton, Hoyle was crestfallen because he felt that his colleagues at Cambridge were unsupportive.\nIn addition to his views on steady state theory and panspermia, Hoyle also supported the following controversial hypotheses and speculations:\nNobel Prize for Physics.\nHoyle was also at the centre of two unrelated controversies involving the politics for selecting recipients of the Nobel Prize for Physics. The first arose when the 1974 prize went in part to Antony Hewish for his leading role in the discovery of pulsars. Hoyle made an off-the-cuff remark to a reporter in Montreal that \"Yes, Jocelyn Bell was the actual discoverer, not Hewish, who was her supervisor, so she should have been included.\" This remark received widespread international coverage. Worried about being misunderstood, Hoyle carefully composed a letter of explanation to \"The Times\".\nThe 1983 prize went in part to William Alfred Fowler \"for his theoretical and experimental studies of the nuclear reactions of importance in the formation of the chemical elements in the universe\" despite Hoyle having been the inventor of the theory of nucleosynthesis in the stars with two research papers published shortly after WWII. So some suspicion arose that Hoyle was denied the third share of this prize because of his earlier public disagreement with the 1974 award. British scientist Harry Kroto later said that the Nobel Prize is not just an award for a piece of work, but a recognition of a scientist's overall reputation and Hoyle's championing many disreputable and disproven ideas may have invalidated him. In his obituary, \"Nature\" editor and fellow Briton John Maddox called it \"shameful\" that Fowler had been rewarded with a Nobel prize and Hoyle had not.\nBecause of his many unorthodox views, Hoyle was described as \"the scientist whose rudeness cost him a Nobel prize\"; Donald D. Clayton wrote that \"He made himself look like a sorehead who only cared about the steady state universe and life from outer space. \u2026 He made himself look foolish.\"\nMedia appearances.\nHoyle appeared in a series of radio talks on astronomy for the BBC in the 1950s; these were collected in the book \"The Nature of the Universe\", and he went on to write a number of other popular science books.\nIn the play \"Sur la route de Montalcino\", the character of Fred Hoyle confronts Georges Lema\u00eetre on a fictional journey to the Vatican in 1957.\nHoyle appeared in the 1973 short film \"Take the World From Another Point of View\".\nIn the 2004 television movie \"Hawking\", Fred Hoyle is played by Peter Firth. In the movie, Stephen Hawking (played by Benedict Cumberbatch) publicly confronts Hoyle at a Royal Society lecture in summer 1964, about a mistake he found in his latest publication.\nHonours.\nAwards\nNamed after him\nMemorabilia.\nThe Fred Hoyle Collection at St John's College Library contains \"a pair of walking boots, five boxes of photographs, two ice axes, some dental X-rays, a telescope, ten large film reels and an unpublished opera\" in addition to 150 document boxes of papers.\nBibliography.\nScience fiction.\nHoyle also wrote science fiction. In his first novel, \"The Black Cloud\", most intelligent life in the universe takes the form of interstellar gas clouds; they are surprised to learn that intelligent life can also form on planets. He wrote a television series, \"A for Andromeda\", which was also published as a novel. His play \"Rockets in Ursa Major\" had a professional production at the Mermaid Theatre in 1962.\nMost of these are independent of each other. \"Andromeda Breakthrough\" is a sequel to \"A for Andromeda\" and \"Into Deepest Space\" is a sequel to \"Rockets in Ursa Major\". The four Ladybird Books are intended for children.\nSome stories of the collection \"Element 79\" are fantasy, in particular \"Welcome to Slippage City\" and \"The Judgement of Aphrodite\". Both introduce mythological characters.\n\"The Telegraph\" (UK) called him a \"masterful\" science fiction writer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11002", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11002", "title": "French cuisine", "text": "Culinary tradition\nFrench cuisine is the cooking traditions and practices of France. In the 14th century, Guillaume Tirel, a court chef known as \"Taillevent\", wrote \"Le Viandier\", one of the earliest recipe collections of medieval France. In the 17th and 18th centuries, chefs Fran\u00e7ois Pierre La Varenne and Marie-Antoine Car\u00eame spearheaded movements that shifted French cooking away from its foreign influences and developed France's own indigenous style.\nCheese and wine are a major part of the cuisine. They play different roles regionally and nationally, with many variations and \"appellation d'origine contr\u00f4l\u00e9e\" (AOC) (regulated appellation) laws.\nCulinary tourism and the \"Guide Michelin\" helped to acquaint commoners with the \"cuisine bourgeoise\" of the urban elites and the peasant cuisine of the French countryside starting in the 20th century. Many dishes that were once regional have proliferated in variations across the country.\nKnowledge of French cooking has contributed significantly to Western cuisines. Its criteria are used widely in Western cookery school boards and culinary education. In November 2010, French gastronomy was added by the UNESCO to its lists of the world's \"intangible cultural heritage\".\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn French medieval cuisine, banquets were common among the aristocracy. Multiple courses would be prepared, but served in a style called \"service en confusion\", or all at once. Food was generally eaten by hand, meats being sliced off in large pieces held between the thumb and two fingers. The sauces were highly seasoned and thick, and heavily flavored mustards were used.\nPies were a common banquet item, with the crust serving primarily as a container, rather than as food itself, and it was not until the very end of the Late Middle Ages that the shortcrust pie was developed.\nMeals often ended with an \"issue de table\", which later changed into the modern dessert, and typically consisted of \"drag\u00e9es\" (in the Middle Ages, meaning spiced lumps of hardened sugar or honey), aged cheese, and spiced wine, such as hypocras.\nThe ingredients of the time varied greatly according to the seasons and the church calendar, and many items were preserved with salt, spices, honey, and other preservatives. Late spring, summer, and autumn afforded abundance, while winter meals were more sparse. Livestock were slaughtered at the beginning of winter. Beef was often salted, while pork was salted and smoked. Bacon and sausages would be smoked in the chimney, while the tongue and hams were brined and dried. Cucumbers were brined as well, while greens would be packed in jars with salt. Fruits, nuts and root vegetables would be boiled in honey for preservation. Whale, dolphin and porpoise were considered fish, so during Lent, the salted meats of these sea mammals were eaten.\nArtificial freshwater ponds (often called \"stews\") held carp, pike, tench, bream, eel, and other fish. Poultry was kept in special yards, with pigeon and squab being reserved for the elite. Game was highly prized, but very rare, and included venison, boar, hare, rabbit, and fowl.\nKitchen gardens provided herbs, including some, such as tansy, rue, pennyroyal, and hyssop, which are rarely used today. Spices were treasured and very expensive at that time\u2014they included pepper, cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, and mace. Some spices used then, but no longer today in French cuisine are cubebs, long pepper (both from vines similar to black pepper), grains of paradise, and galengale.\nSweet-sour flavors were commonly added to dishes with vinegar and \"verjus\" combined with sugar (for the affluent) or honey. A common form of food preparation was to thoroughly cook, pound, and strain mixtures into fine pastes and mushes, something believed to be beneficial to make use of nutrients.\nVisual display was prized. Brilliant colors were obtained by the addition of, for example, juices from spinach and the green part of leeks. Yellow came from saffron or egg yolk, while red came from sunflower, and purple came from \"Crozophora tinctoria\" or \"Heliotropium europaeum\".\nGold and silver leaf were placed on food surfaces and brushed with egg whites. Elaborate and showy dishes were the result, such as \"tourte parmerienne\" which was a pastry dish made to look like a castle with chicken-drumstick turrets coated with gold leaf. One of the grandest showpieces of the time was a roast swan or peacock sewn back into its skin with feathers intact, the feet and beak being gilded. Since both birds are stringy, and taste unpleasant, the skin and feathers could be kept and filled with the cooked, minced and seasoned flesh of tastier birds, like goose or chicken.\nThe most well-known French chef of the Middle Ages was Guillaume Tirel, also known as Taillevent. Taillevent worked in numerous royal kitchens during the 14th century. His first position was as a kitchen boy in 1326. He was chef to Philip VI, then the Dauphin who was son of John II. The Dauphin became King Charles V of France in 1364, with Taillevent as his chief cook. His career spanned sixty-six years, and upon his death, he was buried in grand style between his two wives. His tombstone represents him in armor, holding a shield with three cooking pots, \"marmites\", on it.\nAncien R\u00e9gime.\nParis was the central hub of culture and economic activity, and as such, the most highly skilled culinary craftsmen were to be found there. Markets in Paris such as \"Les Halles\", \"la M\u00e9gisserie\", those found along \"Rue Mouffetard\", and similar smaller versions in other cities were very important to the distribution of food. Those that gave French produce its characteristic identity were regulated by the guild system, which developed in the Middle Ages. In Paris, the guilds were regulated by city government as well as by the French crown. A guild restricted those in a given branch of the culinary industry to operate only within that field.\nThere were two groups of guilds\u2014first, those that supplied the raw materials: butchers, fishmongers, grain merchants, and gardeners. The second group were those that supplied prepared foods: bakers, pastry cooks, sauce makers, poulterers, and caterers. Some guilds offered both raw materials and prepared food, such as the \"charcutiers\" and \"r\u00f4tisseurs\" (purveyors of roasted meat dishes). They would supply cooked meat pies and dishes as well as raw meat and poultry. This caused issues with butchers and poulterers, who sold the same raw materials.\nThe guilds served as a training ground for those within the industry. The degrees of assistant cook, full-fledged cook and master chef were conferred. Those who reached the level of master chef were of considerable rank in their individual industry, and enjoyed a high level of income as well as economic and job security. At times, those in the royal kitchens did fall under the guild hierarchy, but it was necessary to find them a parallel appointment based on their skills after leaving the service of the royal kitchens. This was not uncommon as the Paris cooks' Guild regulations allowed for this movement.\nDuring the 16th and 17th centuries, French cuisine assimilated many new food items from the New World. Although they were slow to be adopted, records of banquets show Catherine de' Medici serving sixty-six turkeys at one dinner. The dish called cassoulet has its roots in the New World discovery of haricot beans, which are central to the dish's creation, but had not existed outside of the Americas until the arrival of Europeans.\n\"Haute cuisine\" (, \"high cuisine\") has foundations during the 17th century with a chef named La Varenne. As an author of works such as \"Le Cuisinier fran\u00e7ois\", he is credited with publishing the first true French cookbook. His book includes the earliest known reference to roux using pork fat. The book contained two sections, one for meat days, and one for fasting. His recipes marked a change from the style of cookery known in the Middle Ages to new techniques aimed at creating somewhat lighter dishes, and more modest presentations of pies as individual pastries and turnovers. La Varenne also published a book on pastry in 1667 entitled \"Le Parfait confitvrier\" (republished as \"Le Confiturier fran\u00e7ois\") which similarly updated and codified the emerging \"haute cuisine\" standards for desserts and pastries.\nChef Fran\u00e7ois Massialot wrote \"Le Cuisinier ro\u00efal et bourgeois\" in 1691, during the reign of Louis XIV. The book contains menus served to the royal courts in 1690. Massialot worked mostly as a freelance cook, and was not employed by any particular household. Massialot and many other royal cooks received special privileges by association with the French royalty. They were not subject to the regulation of the guilds; therefore, they could cater weddings and banquets without restriction. His book is the first to list recipes alphabetically, perhaps a forerunner of the first culinary dictionary. It is in this book that a marinade is first seen in print, with one type for poultry and feathered game, while a second is for fish and shellfish. No quantities are listed in the recipes, which suggests that Massialot was writing for trained cooks.\nThe successive updates of \"Le Cuisinier ro\u00efal et bourgeois\" include important refinements such as adding a glass of wine to fish stock. Definitions were also added to the 1703 edition. The 1712 edition, retitled \"Le Nouveau cuisinier royal et bourgeois\", was increased to two volumes, and was written in a more elaborate style with extensive explanations of technique. Additional smaller preparations are included in this edition as well, leading to lighter preparations, and adding a third course to the meal. Ragout, a stew still central to French cookery, makes its first appearance as a single dish in this edition as well; prior to that, it was listed as a garnish.\nLate 18th century \u2013 early 19th century.\nShortly before the French Revolution, dishes like \"bouch\u00e9es \u00e0 la Reine\" gained prominence. Essentially royal cuisine produced by the royal household, this is a chicken-based recipe served on \"vol-au-vent\" created under the influence of Queen Marie Leszczy\u0144ska, the Polish-born wife of Louis XV. This recipe is still popular today, as are other recipes from Queen Marie Leszczy\u0144ska like \"consomm\u00e9 \u00e0 la Reine\" and \"filet d'aloyau brais\u00e9 \u00e0 la royale\". Queen Marie is also credited with introducing Polonaise garnishing to the French diet.\nThe French Revolution was integral to the expansion of French cuisine, because it abolished the guild system. This meant anyone could now produce and sell any culinary item they wished.\nBread was a significant food source among peasants and the working class in the late 18th century, with many of the nation's people being dependent on it. In French provinces, bread was often consumed three times a day by the people of France. According to Brace, bread was referred to as the basic dietary item for the masses, and it was also used as a foundation for soup. In fact, bread was so important that harvest, interruption of commerce by wars, heavy flour exploration, and prices and supply were all watched and controlled by the French Government. Among the underprivileged, constant fear of famine was always prevalent. From 1725 to 1789, there were fourteen years of bad yields to blame for the low grain supply. In Bordeaux, during 1708\u20131789, thirty-three bad harvests occurred.\nMarie-Antoine Car\u00eame was born in 1784, five years before the Revolution. He spent his younger years working at a \"p\u00e2tisserie\" until he was discovered by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-P\u00e9rigord; he would later cook for Napoleon. Prior to his employment with Talleyrand, Car\u00eame had become known for his \"pi\u00e8ces mont\u00e9es\", which were extravagant constructions of pastry and sugar architecture.\nMore important to Car\u00eame's career was his contribution to the refinement of French cuisine. The basis for his style of cooking was his sauces, which he named mother sauces. Often referred to as fonds, meaning \"foundations\", these base sauces, \"espagnole\", \"velout\u00e9\", and \"b\u00e9chamel\", are still known today. Each of these sauces was made in large quantities in his kitchen, then formed the basis of multiple derivatives. Car\u00eame had over one hundred sauces in his repertoire.\nIn his writings, souffl\u00e9s appear for the first time. Although many of his preparations today seem extravagant, he simplified and codified an even more complex cuisine that existed beforehand. Central to his codification of the cuisine were \"Le Ma\u00eetre d'h\u00f4tel fran\u00e7ais\" (1822), \"Le Cuisinier parisien\" (1828) and \"L'Art de la cuisine fran\u00e7aise au dix-neuvi\u00e8me si\u00e8cle\" (1833\u20135).\nLate 19th century \u2013 early 20th century.\nGeorges Auguste Escoffier is commonly acknowledged as the central figure to the modernization of \"haute cuisine\" and organizing what became the national cuisine of France. His influence began with the rise of some of the great hotels in Europe and America during the 1880s\u20131890s. The Savoy Hotel, managed by C\u00e9sar Ritz, was an early hotel in which Escoffier worked, but much of his influence came during his management of the kitchens in the Carlton from 1898 until 1921. He created a system of \"parties\" called the brigade system, which separated the professional kitchen into five separate stations.\nThese five stations included the \"garde manger\" that prepared cold dishes; the \"entremettier\", which prepared starches and vegetables; the \"r\u00f4tisseur\", which prepared roasts, grilled and fried dishes; the \"saucier\", which prepared sauces and soups; and the \"p\u00e2tissier\", preparing all pastry and desserts items.\nThis system meant that instead of one person preparing a dish on one's own, multiple cooks would prepare the different components for the dish. An example used is \"oeufs au plat Meyerbeer\"; under the prior system, the dish would take up to fifteen minutes to prepare, while in the new system, the eggs would be prepared by the \"entremettier\", kidney grilled by the \"r\u00f4tisseur\", and truffle sauce made by the \"saucier\", and thus the dish could be prepared in a shorter time and served quickly.\nEscoffier also simplified and organized the modern menu and structure of the meal. He published a series of articles in professional journals which outlined the sequence, and he finally published his \"Livre des menus\" in 1912. This type of service embraced the \"service \u00e0 la russe\" (serving meals in separate courses on individual plates), which F\u00e9lix Urbain Dubois had made popular in the 1860s. Escoffier's largest contribution was the publication of \"Le Guide Culinaire\" in 1903, which established the fundamentals of French cookery. The book was a collaboration with Phil\u00e9as Gilbert, E. Fetu, A. Suzanne, B. Reboul, Ch. Dietrich, A. Caillat and others. The significance of this is to illustrate the universal acceptance by multiple high-profile chefs to this new style of cooking.\n\"Le Guide Culinaire\" deemphasized the use of heavy sauces and leaned toward lighter \"fumets\", which are the essence of flavor taken from fish, meat and vegetables. This style of cooking looked to create garnishes and sauces whose function is to add to the flavor of the dish, rather than mask flavors like the heavy sauces and ornate garnishes of the past. Escoffier took inspiration for his work from personal recipes in addition to recipes from Car\u00eame, Dubois and ideas from Taillevent's \"Le Viandier\", a modern version of which was published in 1897. A second source for recipes came from existing peasant dishes that were translated into the refined techniques of \"haute cuisine\".\nThe third source of recipes was Escoffier himself, who invented many new dishes, such as \"p\u00eache Melba\". Escoffier updated \"Le Guide Culinaire\" four times during his lifetime, noting in the foreword to the book's first edition that even with its 5,000 recipes, the book should not be considered an \"exhaustive\" text, and that even if it were at the point when he wrote the book, \"it would no longer be so tomorrow, because progress marches on each day.\"\nThis period is also marked by the appearance of \"nouvelle cuisine\". The term \"nouvelle cuisine\" has been used many times in the history of French cuisine which emphasized the freshness, lightness and clarity of flavor and inspired by new movements in world cuisine. In the 1740s, Menon first used the term, but the cooking of Vincent La Chapelle and Fran\u00e7ois Marin was also considered modern. In the 1960s, Henri Gault and Christian Millau revived it to describe the cooking of Paul Bocuse, Jean and Pierre Troisgros, Michel Gu\u00e9rard, Roger Verg\u00e9 and Raymond Oliver. These chefs were working toward rebelling against the \"orthodoxy\" of Escoffier's cuisine. Some of the chefs were students of Fernand Point at the \"Pyramide\" in Vienne, and had left to open their own restaurants. Gault and Millau \"discovered the formula\" contained in ten characteristics of this new style of cooking. Those characteristics were:\n1. A rejection of excessive complication in cooking.\n2. The cooking times for most fish, seafood, game birds, veal, green vegetables and \"p\u00e2t\u00e9s\" were greatly reduced in an attempt to preserve the natural flavors. Steaming was an important trend emerging from this characteristic.\n3. The cuisine was made with the freshest possible ingredients.\n4. Large menus were abandoned in favor of shorter menus.\n5. Strong marinades for meat and game ceased to be used.\n6. They stopped using heavy sauces such as \"espagnole\" and \"b\u00e9chamel\" thickened with flour-based \"roux\" in favor of seasoning their dishes with fresh herbs, quality butter, lemon juice, and vinegar.\n7. They used regional dishes for inspiration instead of \"haute cuisine\" dishes.\n8. New techniques were embraced and modern equipment was often used; Bocuse even used microwave ovens.\n9. The chefs paid close attention to the dietary needs of their guests through their dishes.\n10. The chefs were highly innovative and created new combinations and pairings.\nSome have speculated that a contributor to the emergence of \"nouvelle cuisine\" was World War II, when animal protein was in short supply during the German occupation. By the mid-1980s, food writers stated that \"nouvelle cuisine\" had reached exhaustion and many chefs began returning to the \"haute cuisine\" style of cooking, although many of the lighter presentations and new techniques remained.\nNational cuisine.\nThere are many dishes that are considered part of French national cuisine today.\nA meal often consists of three courses, \"hors d'\u0153uvre\" or \"entr\u00e9e\" (introductory course, sometimes soup), \"plat principal\" (main course), \"fromage\" (cheese course) or \"dessert\", sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert.\nThe notion of a French national cuisine is understood as a set of foods that all people eat and have strong opinions about, regardless of class. Those who are poorer still eat the same foods as the rich, albeit less frequently.\nRegional cuisine.\nFrench regional cuisine is characterized by its extreme diversity and style. Traditionally, each region of France has its own distinctive cuisine.\nParis and \u00cele-de-France.\nParis and \u00cele-de-France are central regions where almost anything from the country is available, as all train lines meet in the city. Over 9,000 restaurants exist in Paris and almost any cuisine can be obtained here. High-quality Michelin Guide-rated restaurants proliferate here.\nChampagne, Lorraine, and Alsace.\nGame and ham are popular in Champagne, as well as the special sparkling wine simply known as Champagne. Fine fruit preserves are known from Lorraine as well as the quiche Lorraine. Alsace, a region of historically Allemanic German culture, has retained elements of German cuisine, especially similar to those from the neighboring Palatinate and Baden region, but has implemented French influences since France first took control of the region in the 17th century. As such, beers made in the area are similar to the style of bordering Germany. Dishes like \"choucroute\" (French for \"sauerkraut\") are also popular. Many \"eaux de vie\" (distilled alcohol from fruit, comparable to schnaps) are from this region, due to a wide variety of local fruits (cherry, raspberry, pear, grapes) and especially prunes (mirabelle, plum).[9]:259,295\nNord Pas-de-Calais, Picardy, Normandy, and Brittany.\nThe coastline supplies many crustaceans, sea bass, monkfish and herring. Normandy has top-quality seafood, such as scallops and sole, while Brittany has a supply of lobster, crayfish and mussels.\nNormandy is home to a large population of apple trees; apples are often used in dishes, as well as cider and Calvados. The northern areas of this region, especially Nord, grow ample amounts of wheat, sugar beets and chicory. Thick stews are found often in these northern areas as well.\nThe produce of these northern regions is also considered some of the best in the country, including cauliflower and artichokes. Buckwheat grows widely in Brittany as well and is used in the region's \"galettes\", called \"jalet\", which is where this dish originated.\nLoire Valley and central France.\nHigh-quality fruits come from the Loire Valley and central France, including cherries grown for the liqueur \"Guignolet\" and \"Belle Angevine\" pears. The strawberries and melons are also of high quality.\nFish are seen in the cuisine, often served with a \"beurre blanc\" sauce, as well as wild game, lamb, calves, Charolais cattle, \"G\u00e9line\" fowl, and goat cheeses.\nYoung vegetables are used often, as are the specialty mushrooms of the region, \"champignons de Paris\". Vinegars from Orl\u00e9ans are a specialty ingredient used as well.\nBurgundy and Franche-Comt\u00e9.\nBurgundy and Franche-Comt\u00e9 are known for their wines. Pike, perch, river crabs, snails, game, redcurrants, blackcurrants all originate here.\nSavory specialties accounted in the \"Cuisine franc-comtoise\" from the Franche-Comt\u00e9 region are \"cro\u00fbte aux morilles\", \"Poulet \u00e0 la Comtoise\", trout, smoked meats and cheeses such as Mont d'Or, Comt\u00e9 and Morbier which are best eaten hot or cold, \"coq au vin jaune\" and the special dessert \"g\u00e2teau de m\u00e9nage\".\nCharolais beef, poultry from Bresse, sea snail, honey cake, Chaource and \u00c9poisses cheese are specialties of the local cuisine of Burgundy. Dijon mustard is also a specialty of Burgundy cuisine. \"Cr\u00e8me de cassis\" is a popular liquor made from blackcurrants. Oils are used in the cooking here, including nut oils and rapeseed oil.\nAuvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes.\nThe area covers the old province of Dauphin\u00e9, once known as the \"larder\" of France, that gave its name to \"gratin dauphinois\", traditionally made in a large baking dish rubbed with garlic. Successive layers of potatoes, salt, pepper and milk are piled up to the top of the dish. It is then baked in the oven at low temperature for 2 hours.\nFruit and young vegetables are popular in the cuisine from the Rh\u00f4ne valley, as are wines like Hermitage AOC, Crozes-Hermitage AOC and Condrieu AOC. Walnuts and walnut products and oil from Noix de Grenoble AOC, lowland cheeses, like St. Marcellin, St. F\u00e9licien and Bleu du Vercors-Sassenage.\nPoultry from Bresse, guinea fowl from Dr\u00f4me and fish from the Dombes, a light yeast-based cake, called Pogne de Romans and the regional speciality, \"Raviole du Dauphin\u00e9\", and there is the short-crust \"Suisse\", a Valence biscuit speciality.\nLakes and mountain streams in Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes are key to the cuisine as well. Lyon and Savoy supply sausages while the Alpine regions supply their specialty cheeses like Beaufort, Abondance, Reblochon, Tomme and Vacherin.\n\"M\u00e8res lyonnaises\" are female cooks particular to this region who provide local gourmet establishments. Celebrated chefs from this region include Fernand Point, Paul Bocuse, the Troisgros brothers and Alain Chapel.\nThe Chartreuse Mountains are the source of the green and yellow digestif liquor Chartreuse, produced by the monks of the Grande Chartreuse.\nSince the 2014 administrative reform, the ancient area of Auvergne is now part of the region. One of its leading chefs is Regis Marcon.\nPoitou-Charentes and Limousin.\nOysters come from the Ol\u00e9ron-Marennes basin, while mussels come from the Bay of Aiguillon.\nHigh-quality produce comes from the region's hinterland, especially goat cheese. This region and in the Vend\u00e9e is grazing ground for \"Parthenaise\" cattle, while poultry is raised in Challans.\nThe region of Poitou-Charentes purportedly produces the best butter and cream in France. Cognac is also made in the region along the river Charente.\nLimousin is home to the Limousin cattle, as well as sheep. The woodlands offer game and mushrooms. The southern area around Brive draws its cooking influence from P\u00e9rigord and Auvergne to produce a robust cuisine.\nBordeaux, P\u00e9rigord, Gascony, and Basque country.\nBordeaux, a renowned French city, lends its name to a distinctive wine style celebrated worldwide.\u00a0 Bordeaux, along with the larger Aquitaine region, ranks among the top three wine destinations globally, alongside Napa Valley and Tuscany. Saint-Emilion, a UNESCO World Heritage village, is a key destination, drawing a multitude of wine tourists to the region.\nBordeaux's diverse viticultural regions specialize in a range of grape varieties such as Merlot, Cabernet Franc, and increasingly Cabernet Sauvignon, each thriving in the picturesque landscapes of the area. This variety contributes significantly to the region's rich viticultural diversity and the production of wines of strong quality.\nBuilding on this agricultural foundation, Bordeaux wine offers a rich history, varied terroir, and complex flavor profile, making it highly versatile for food pairing across various cuisines and occasions. Traditional Bordeaux blends typically include the aforementioned Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, and Cabernet Franc, providing a spectrum of flavors and textures that complement a wide array of dishes.\nLighter wines like Bordeaux Blanc or a light-bodied Bordeaux Rouge can elegantly accompany seafood or poultry. The crisp acidity and citrus notes of Bordeaux Blanc complement delicate seafood dishes like grilled fish or shrimp cocktail, while the soft tannins of a light Bordeaux Rouge enhance the flavors of roasted chicken or turkey. Moreover, Bordeaux Rouge wines pair beautifully with dishes like roasted lamb, duck breast, or vegetable stews. The wine's balanced fruitiness and moderate tannins complement the richness of the proteins without overpowering the palate.\nMeanwhile, more robust Bordeaux Rouge wines, particularly from renowned appellations like Saint-\u00c9milion, are perfect for richer, savory dishes such as grilled steak or braised beef, where their intense fruit flavors and firm tannins provide a balanced counterpoint to the umami-rich flavors.\u00a0Understanding this interplay of flavors allows diners to elevate their culinary experiences, creating memorable pairings with Bordeaux wines.\nThe Pyrenees also has lamb, such as the ', as well as sheep cheeses. Beef cattle in the region include the \"Blonde d'Aquitaine\", ', ', and '.\nFree-range chicken, turkey, pigeon, capon, goose and duck prevail in the region as well. Gascony and P\u00e9rigord cuisines includes \"p\u00e2t\u00e9s\", \"terrines\", \"confits\" and \"\". This is one of the regions notable for its production of \"foie gras\", or fattened goose or duck liver.\nThe cuisine of the region is often heavy and farm-based. Armagnac is also from this region, as are prunes from Agen.\nToulouse, Quercy, and Aveyron.\nGers, a department of France, is within this region and has poultry, while La Montagne Noire and Lacaune area offer hams and dry sausages.\nWhite corn is planted heavily in the area both for use in fattening ducks and geese for foie gras and for the production of \"\", a cornmeal porridge. Haricot beans are also grown in this area, which are central to the dish \"cassoulet\".\nThe finest sausage in France is \"saucisse de Toulouse\", which is also part of \"cassoulet\" of Toulouse. The Cahors area produces a specialty \"black wine\" as well as truffles and mushrooms.\nThis region also produces milk-fed lamb. Unpasteurized ewe's milk is used to produce Roquefort in Aveyron, while in Laguiole is producing unpasteurized cow's milk cheese. Salers cattle produce milk for cheese, as well as beef and veal products.\nThe volcanic soils create flinty cheeses and superb lentils. Mineral waters are produced in high volume in this region as well. Cab\u00e9cou cheese is from Rocamadour, a medieval settlement erected directly on a cliff, in the rich countryside of Causses du Quercy.\nThis area is one of the region's oldest milk producers; it has chalky soil, marked by history and human activity, and is favourable for the raising of goats.\nRoussillon, Languedoc, and C\u00e9vennes.\nRestaurants are popular in the area known as \"Le Midi\". Oysters come from the \u00c9tang de Thau, to be served in the restaurants of Bouzigues, M\u00e8ze, and S\u00e8te. Mussels are commonly seen here in addition to fish specialties of S\u00e8te, ', ' and \"rouille de seiche\".\nIn the Languedoc \"jambon cru\", sometimes known as \"jambon de montagne\" is produced. High quality \"Roquefort\" comes from the \"brebis\" (sheep) on the Larzac plateau.\nThe Les C\u00e9vennes area offers mushrooms, chestnuts, berries, honey, lamb, game, sausages, \"p\u00e2t\u00e9s\" and goat cheeses. Catalan influence can be seen in the cuisine here with dishes like \"brandade\" made from a pur\u00e9e of dried cod wrapped in mangold leaves. Snails are plentiful and are prepared in a specific Catalan style known as a \"cargolade\". Wild boar can be found in the more mountainous regions of the \"Midi\".\nProvence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur.\nThe Provence and C\u00f4te d'Azur region is rich in citrus, vegetables, fruits and herbs; the region is one of the largest suppliers of all these ingredients in France. The region also produces the largest amount of olives, and creates high-quality olive oil. Lavender is used in many dishes in Haute-Provence. Other important herbs in the cuisine include thyme, sage, rosemary, basil, savory, fennel, marjoram, tarragon, oregano, and bay leaf. Honey is a prized ingredient in the region.\nSeafood is widely available throughout the coastal area and is heavily represented in the cuisine. Goat cheeses, air-dried sausages, lamb, beef, and chicken are popular here. Garlic and anchovies are used in many of the region's sauces, as in \"poulet Proven\u00e7al\", which uses white wine, tomatoes, herbs, and sometimes anchovies. Pastis is found everywhere that alcohol is served.\nThe cuisine uses a large amount of vegetables for lighter preparations. Truffles are commonly seen in Provence during the winter. Thirteen desserts in Provence are the traditional Christmas dessert, and may include, for example, quince cheese, biscuits, almonds, nougat, apple, and \"fougasse\".\nRice is grown in the Camargue, which is the northernmost rice-growing area in Europe, with Camargue red rice being a specialty. Anibal Camous, a Marseillais who lived to be 104, maintained that it was by eating garlic daily that he kept his \"youth\" and brilliance. When his eighty-year-old son died, the father mourned, \"I always told him he wouldn't live long, poor boy. He ate too little garlic!\"\nCorsica.\nGoats and sheep proliferate on the island of Corsica, and lamb are used to prepare dishes such as \"\", \"ragouts\" and roasts. Cheeses are also produced, with \"brocciu\" being the most popular.\nChestnuts, growing in the Castagniccia forest, are used to produce flour, which is used in turn to make bread, cakes and \"polenta\". The forest provides acorns used to feed the pigs and boars that provide much of the protein for the island's cuisine. Fresh fish and seafood are common.\nThe island's pork is used to make fine hams, sausage and other unique items including \"coppa\" (dried rib cut), ' (dried pork fillet), ' (smoked and dried liverwurst), \"salumu\" (a dried sausage), \"salcietta\", \"Panzetta\", bacon, and \"\" (farmer's ham).\nClementines (which hold an AOC designation), lemons, nectarines and figs are grown there. Candied citron is used in nougats, while and the aforementioned \"brocciu\" and chestnuts are also used in desserts.\nCorsica offers a variety of wines and fruit liqueurs, including Cap Corse, Patrimonio, C\u00e9dratine, Bonapartine, \"\", \"vins de fruit\", , and \"eau-de-vie de ch\u00e2taigne\".\nFrench Guiana.\nFrench Guianan cuisine or Guianan cuisine is a blend of the different cultures that have settled in French Guiana including European, Indian, Indigenous (Amerindian), Chinese, and Hmong influences. Common dishes include fricass\u00e9s, stews made of awara broth (made from palm pulp), blaff (onions, garlic, celery and basil broth), pimentade (tomato sauce broth) or roast cougnade (grilled fish), and Colombos (meat-based stew and vegetables with curry). There are markets in Cayenne selling fresh and prepared foods among other items. Some dishes from Metropolitan France are reimagined using local ingredients such as Gratin de Couac using cassava root in lieu of potato.\nR\u00e9union.\nThe cuisine of R\u00e9union is a Creole cuisine (in French, \"Cr\u00e9ole\") with a mixture of cooking styles and ingredients. It is strongly influenced by Malagasy cuisine (from Madagascar), as well as other cuisines from East Africa. It also incorporates elements of larger French, Indian and Chinese cuisines, brought by French colonialization and Indian and Chinese immigrants respectively. Notable dishes include samosas, bouchons, rougail, and various curries.\nMartinique.\nThe cuisine of Martinique is a Creole cuisine with a mix of French, indigenous, African, and Indian cooking styles using local ingredients such as breadfruit, cassava, and christophene. Creole dishes rely heavily on seafood, including curries and fritters. Cr\u00eaperies, Brasseries, and restaurants featuring cuisine from various French regions can be found all over Martinique. Notable local dishes include Accra a fish-based fritter, Boudin sausage, Fricass\u00e9e de chatrou an octopus stew, Colombo de Martinique a coconut-milk based curry, and Ti Punch a rum and cane juice based drink.\nGuadeloupe.\nThe cuisine of Guadeloupe includes Caribbean, African, European and Indian influences. Notable dishes includes the fish fritter accra, a savory stuffed donut called bokit, and coconut-based desserts like custard and sorbet. Notably. the spice blend \"colombo\" or \"massal\u00e9\" is a curry-like mix of pepper, saffron, coriander, cumin and garlic with the flavor profile included by Sri Lankan immigrants. The island is also known for rums and includes nine distilleries producing traditional and agricultural rum.\nNew Caledonia.\nThe cuisine of New Caledonia includes local Kanak, Melanesian, and traditional French cooking styles. A notable local dish is bougna which is a stew composed of starches, taros, sweet potatoes, poingo bananas, yams, and is accompanied by local meat and cooked in coconut milk. Seafood is also common including fish and lobster. Traditional French pastries, breads, cheeses, and wines may also be found especially in the capital of Noum\u00e9a.\nFrench Polynesia.\nThe cuisine of French Polynesia includes a significant array of fruits and vegetables especially sweet potato and coconut. Due to the island nature of the region, seafood is also very common. The \"ahima\u2019a\", is a traditional Polynesian underground oven in which hot stones are placed inside to cook the ingredients. Notable dishes include Faraoa 'ipo, Poisson cru and R\u0113ti'a.\nMayotte.\nThe cuisine of Mayotte includes influences from European France, Portugal, the Arab world, and India. Common food includes rice as a daily staple mixed with root vegetables, plantains, fresh and dried fish, and milk from grated coconuts and meat. Notable dishes include Chahoula ya nadzi, rice boiled in water or coconut milk generally served for large meals and makarara a festive fried cake that is prepared into rolls of dough made of flour and coconut milk.\nSpecialties by season.\nFrench cuisine varies according to the season. In summer, salads and fruit dishes are popular because they are refreshing and produce is inexpensive and abundant. Greengrocers prefer to sell their fruits and vegetables at lower prices if needed, rather than see them rot in the heat. At the end of summer, mushrooms become plentiful and appear in stews throughout France. The hunting season begins in September and runs through February. Game of all kinds is eaten, often in elaborate dishes that celebrate the success of the hunt. Shellfish are at their peak when winter turns to spring, and oysters appear in restaurants in large quantities.\nWith the advent of deep-freeze and the air-conditioned \"hypermarch\u00e9\", these seasonal variations are less marked than before, but they are still observed, in some cases due to legal restrictions. Crayfish, for example, have a short season and it is illegal to catch them out of season. Moreover, they do not freeze well.\nFoods and ingredients.\nFrench regional cuisines use locally grown vegetables, such as \"pomme de terre\" (potato), \"bl\u00e9\" (wheat), \"haricots verts\" (a type of French green bean), \"carotte\" (carrot), \"poireau\" (leek), \"navet\" (turnip), \"aubergine\" (eggplant), \"courgette\" (zucchini), and \"\u00e9chalotte\" (shallot).\nFrench regional cuisines use locally grown fungi, such as \"truffe\" (truffle), \"champignon de Paris\" (button mushroom), \"chanterelle ou girolle\" (chanterelle), \"pleurote (en hu\u00eetre)\" (oyster mushrooms), and \"c\u00e8pes\" (porcini).\nCommon fruits include oranges, tomatoes, tangerines, peaches, apricots, apples, pears, plums, cherries, strawberries, raspberries, redcurrants, blackberries, grapes, grapefruit, and blackcurrants.\nVarieties of meat consumed include \"poulet\" (chicken), \"pigeon\" (squab), \"canard\" (duck), \"oie\" (goose, the source of foie gras), \"b\u0153uf\" (beef), \"veau\" (veal), \"porc\" (pork), \"agneau\" (lamb), \"mouton\" (mutton), \"caille\" (quail), \"cheval\" (horse), \"grenouille\" (frog), and \"escargot\" (snails). Commonly consumed fish and seafood include cod, canned sardines, fresh sardines, canned tuna, fresh tuna, salmon, trout, mussels, herring, oysters, shrimp and calamari.\nEggs often eaten as: omelettes, hard-boiled with mayonnaise, scrambled plain, scrambled \"haute cuisine\" preparation, \"\".\nHerbs and seasonings vary by region, and include \"fleur de sel\", \"herbes de Provence\", \"olive\", tarragon, rosemary, marjoram, lavender, thyme, fennel, and sage.\nFresh fruit and vegetables, as well as fish and meat, can be purchased either from supermarkets or specialty shops. Street markets are held on certain days in most localities; some towns have a more permanent covered market enclosing food shops, especially meat and fish retailers. These have better shelter than the periodic street markets.\nStructure of meals.\nBreakfast.\n\"Le petit d\u00e9jeuner\" (breakfast) is traditionally a quick meal consisting of \"tartines\" (slices) of French bread with butter and honey or jam (sometimes brioche), along with \"caf\u00e9 au lait\" (also called \"caf\u00e9 cr\u00e8me\"), or black coffee, or tea and rarely hot chicory. Children often drink hot chocolate in bowls or cups along with their breakfasts. \"Croissants\", \"pain aux raisins\" or \"pain au chocolat\" (also named \"chocolatine\" in the south-west of France) are mostly included as a weekend treat. Breakfast of some kind is always served in caf\u00e9s opening early in the day.\nThere are also savoury dishes for breakfast. An example is \"le petit d\u00e9jeuner gaulois\" or \"petit d\u00e9jeuner fermier\" with the famous long narrow bread slices topped with soft white cheese or boiled ham, called \"mouillettes\", which is dipped in a soft-boiled egg and some fruit juice and hot drink.\nAnother variation called \"le petit d\u00e9jeuner chasseur\", meant to be very hearty, is served with \"p\u00e2t\u00e9\" and other \"charcuterie\" products. A more classy version is called \"le petit d\u00e9jeuner du voyageur\", where delicatessens serve gizzard, bacon, salmon, omelet, or \"croque monsieur\", with or without soft-boiled egg and always with the traditional coffee/tea/chocolate along fruits or fruit juice. When the egg is cooked sunny-side over the \"croque-monsieur\", it is called a \"croque-madame\".\nIn \"Germinal\" and other novels, \u00c9mile Zola also mentioned the \"briquet\": two long bread slices stuffed with butter, cheese and or ham. It can be eaten as a standing/walking breakfast, or meant as a \"second\" one before lunch.\nIn the movie \"Bienvenue chez les Ch'tis\", Philippe Abrams (Kad Merad) and Antoine Bailleul (Dany Boon) share together countless breakfasts consisting of \"tartines de Maroilles\" (a strong cheese) along with their hot chicory.\nLunch.\n\"Le d\u00e9jeuner\" (lunch) is a two-hour mid-day meal or a one-hour lunch break. In some smaller towns and in the south of France, the two-hour lunch may still be customary. Sunday lunches are often longer and are taken with the family. Restaurants normally open for lunch at noon and close at 2:30\u00a0pm. Some restaurants are closed on Monday during lunch hours.\nIn large cities, a majority of working people and students eat their lunch at a corporate or school cafeteria, which normally serves complete meals as described above; it is not usual for students to bring their own lunch to eat. For companies that do not operate a cafeteria, it is mandatory for employees to be given lunch vouchers as part of their employee benefits. These can be used in most restaurants, supermarkets and \"traiteurs\"; however, workers having lunch in this way typically do not eat all three courses of a traditional lunch due to price and time constraints. In smaller cities and towns, some working people leave their workplaces to return home for lunch. An alternative, especially among blue-collar workers, is eating sandwiches followed by a dessert; both dishes can be found ready-made at bakeries and supermarkets at budget prices.\nDinner.\n\"Le d\u00eener\" (dinner) often consists of three courses, \"hors d'\u0153uvre\" or \"entr\u00e9e\" (appetizers or introductory course, sometimes soup), \"plat principal\" (main course), and a cheese course or dessert, sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert. Yogurt may replace the cheese course, while a simple dessert would be fresh fruit. The meal is often accompanied by bread, wine and mineral water. Most of the time the bread would be a baguette which is very common in France and is made almost every day. Main meat courses are often served with vegetables, along with potatoes, rice or pasta. Restaurants often open at 7:30\u00a0pm for dinner, and stop taking orders between the hours of 10:00\u00a0pm and 11:00\u00a0pm. Some restaurants close for dinner on Sundays.\nBeverages.\nIn French cuisine, a beverage that precedes a meal is called an \"ap\u00e9ritif\" (literally: \"that opens the appetite\"), and can be served with an \"amuse-gueule\" (literally: \"mouth amuser\"). Those that end it are called \"digestifs\". During the meal, plates are served with water, wine or sometimes beer (\"choucroute\" and beer, for example).\nThe \"ap\u00e9ritif\" varies from region to region: Pastis is popular in the south of France, Cr\u00e9mant d'Alsace in the eastern region. Champagne can also be served. Kir, also called \"blanc-cassis\", is a common and popular \"ap\u00e9ritif\"-cocktail made with a measure of \"cr\u00e8me de cassis\" (blackcurrant liqueur) topped up with white wine. The phrase \"kir royal\" is used when white wine is replaced with a Champagne wine. A simple glass of red wine, such as Beaujolais nouveau, can also be presented as an \"ap\u00e9ritif\", accompanied by an \"amuse-bouche\". Some \"ap\u00e9ritifs\" can be fortified wines with added herbs, such as cinchona, gentian and vermouth. Trade names that sell well include Suze (the classic gentiane), Byrrh, Dubonnet, and Noilly Prat. Beer can also be an \"ap\u00e9ritif\". Other drinks are fruit juices or syrups for children.\n\"Digestifs\" are traditionally stronger, and include Cognac, Armagnac, Calvados, \"eau de vie\" and fruit alcohols.\nChristmas.\nA typical French Christmas dish is turkey or capon, with chestnuts. Other common dishes are smoked salmon, oysters, caviar and \"foie gras\". The Yule log (\"b\u00fbche de No\u00ebl\") is a very French tradition during Christmas. Chocolate and cakes also occupy a prominent place for Christmas in France. This cuisine is normally accompanied by Champagne. Tradition says that thirteen desserts complete the Christmas meal in reference to the twelve apostles and Christ.\nFood establishments.\nHistory.\nThe modern restaurant has its origins in French culture. Prior to the late-18th century, diners who wished to \"dine out\" would visit their local guild-member's kitchen and have their meal prepared for them. However, guild members were limited to producing whatever their guild registry delegated to them. These guild members offered food in their own homes to a steady clientele that appeared day-to-day but at set times. The guest would be offered the meal \"table d'h\u00f4te\", which is a meal offered at a set price with very little choice of dishes, sometimes none at all.\nThe first steps toward the modern restaurant were locations that offered \"restorative\" , or \u2014this word being the origin of the term \"restaurant\". This process took place during the 1760s and 1770s. These locations were open at all times of the day, featuring ornate tableware and reasonable prices. These locations were meant more as meal replacements for those who had \"lost their appetites and suffered from jaded palates and weak chests.\"\nIn 1782 Antoine Beauvilliers, pastry chef to the Count of Provence (the future King Louis XVIII), opened one of the most popular restaurants of the time\u2014the \"Grande Taverne de Londres\"\u2014in the arcades of the Palais-Royal. Other restaurants were opened by chefs of the time who were leaving the failing monarchy of France, in the period leading up to the 1789 French Revolution. It was these restaurants which expanded upon the limited menus of prior decades, and which led to the full restaurants that were completely legalized with the advent of the French Revolution and the abolition of the guilds. This and the substantial discretionary income of the of the French Directory period (1795 to 1799) helped to sustain these new restaurants.\nRestaurant staff.\nLarger restaurants and hotels in France employ extensive staff and are commonly referred to as either the \"kitchen brigade\" for the kitchen staff or \"dining room brigade\" system for the dining room staff. This system was created by Georges Auguste Escoffier. This structured team system delegates responsibilities to different individuals who specialize in certain tasks. The following is a list of positions held both in the kitchen and dining rooms brigades in France:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11003", "revid": "50263362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11003", "title": "Five-spice powder", "text": "Spice mixture used in Chinese cuisine\nFive-spice powder () is a spice mixture of five or more spices\u2014commonly star anise, cloves, Chinese cinnamon, Sichuan pepper, and fennel seeds\u2014used predominantly in almost all branches of Chinese cuisine. The five flavors of the spices reflect the five traditional Chinese elements (wood, fire, earth, metal, and water) and flavors (sweet, bitter, sour, salty, and savory). The addition of eight other spices creates thirteen-spice powder (), which is used less commonly.\nIngredients.\nWhile there are many variants, a common mix is:\nOther recipes may contain anise seed, ginger root, nutmeg, turmeric, \"Amomum villosum\" pods (\"sh\u0101r\u00e9n\" ), \"Amomum cardamomum\" pods (\"b\u00e1id\u00f2uk\u00f2u\" ), licorice, Mandarin orange peel or galangal.\nIn Southern China, \"Cinnamomum loureiroi\" and Mandarin orange peel are commonly used as substitutes for \"Cinnamomum cassia\" and cloves respectively. These ingredients collectively produce southern five-spice powder's distinctive, slightly different flavor profile.\nUse.\nFive-spice powder is used as a spice rub for chicken, duck, goose, pork, and seafood, in red cooking recipes, or added to the breading for fried foods. Five-spice powder is used in recipes for Cantonese roasted duck, as well as beef stew. Canned spiced pork cubes are very popular as well. Five-spice powder is used as a marinade for Vietnamese broiled chicken. The five-spice powder mixture has followed the Chinese diaspora and has been incorporated into other national cuisines throughout Asia.\nA seasoned salt can be easily made by dry-roasting common salt with five-spice powder under low heat in a dry pan until the spice and salt are well mixed.\nFive-spice powder can also add complexity and savoriness to sweets and savory dishes alike.\nIt has a traditional use as an antiseptic and a cure for indigestion. In one study, the potential antioxidant capacities of Chinese five-spice powder (consisting of Sichuan pepper, fennel seed, cinnamon, star anise, and clove) with varying proportion of individual spice ingredients was investigated through four standard methods. The results suggest that clove is the major contributor to the high antioxidant capacities of the five-spice powder, whereas the other four ingredients contribute only to the flavor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11004", "revid": "49834186", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11004", "title": "Fundamental group", "text": "Mathematical group of the homotopy classes of loops in a topological space\nIn the mathematical field of algebraic topology, the fundamental group of a topological space is the group of the equivalence classes under homotopy of the loops contained in the space. It records information about the basic shape, or holes, of the topological space. The fundamental group is the first and simplest homotopy group. The fundamental group is a homotopy invariant\u2014topological spaces that are homotopy equivalent (or the stronger case of homeomorphic) have isomorphic fundamental groups. The fundamental group of a topological space formula_1 is denoted by formula_2.\nIntuition.\nStart with a space (for example, a surface), and some point in it, and all the loops both starting and ending at this point\u2014paths that start at this point, wander around and eventually return to the starting point. Two loops can be combined in an obvious way: travel along the first loop, then along the second.\nTwo loops are considered equivalent if one can be deformed into the other without breaking. The set of all such loops with this method of combining and this equivalence between them is the fundamental group for that particular space.\nHistory.\nHenri Poincar\u00e9 defined the fundamental group in 1895 in his paper \"Analysis situs\". The concept emerged in the theory of Riemann surfaces, in the work of Bernhard Riemann, Poincar\u00e9, and Felix Klein. It describes the monodromy properties of complex-valued functions, as well as providing a complete topological classification of closed surfaces.\nDefinition.\nThroughout this article, formula_1 is a topological space. A typical example is a surface such as the one depicted at the right. Moreover, formula_4 is a point in formula_1 called the \"base-point\". (As is explained below, its role is rather auxiliary.) The idea of the definition of the homotopy group is to measure how many (broadly speaking) curves on formula_1 can be deformed into each other. The precise definition depends on the notion of the homotopy of loops, which is explained first.\nHomotopy of loops.\nGiven a topological space formula_1, a \"loop based at formula_4\" is defined to be a continuous function (also known as a continuous map)\nformula_9\nsuch that the starting point formula_10 and the end point formula_11 are both equal to formula_4.\nA \"homotopy\" is a continuous interpolation between two loops. More precisely, a homotopy between two loops formula_13 (based at the same point formula_4) is a continuous map\nformula_15\nsuch that\nIf such a homotopy formula_25 exists, formula_26 and formula_27 are said to be \"homotopic\". The relation \"formula_26 is homotopic to formula_27\" is an equivalence relation so that the set of equivalence classes can be considered:\nformula_30.\nThis set (with the group structure described below) is called the \"fundamental group\" of the topological space formula_1 at the base point formula_4. The purpose of considering the equivalence classes of loops up to homotopy, as opposed to the set of all loops (the so-called loop space of formula_1) is that the latter, while being useful for various purposes, is a rather big and unwieldy object. By contrast the above quotient is, in many cases, more manageable and computable.\nGroup structure.\nBy the above definition, formula_34 is just a set. It becomes a group (and therefore deserves the name fundamental \"group\") using the concatenation of loops. More precisely, given two loops formula_35, their product is defined as the loop\nformula_36\nformula_37\nThus the loop formula_38 first follows the loop formula_39 with \"twice the speed\" and then follows formula_40 with \"twice the speed\".\nThe product of two homotopy classes of loops formula_41 and formula_42 is then defined as formula_43. It can be shown that this product does not depend on the choice of representatives and therefore gives a well-defined operation on the set formula_34. This operation turns formula_34 into a group. Its neutral element is the equivalence (homotopy) class of the constant loop, which stays at formula_4 for all times formula_19 (i.e. this class consists of all loops that can be continuously deformed into the constant loop; intuitively speaking of all the loops that do not \"wrap around a hole\"). The inverse of a (homotopy class of a) loop is the same loop, but traversed in the opposite direction (which is in a different homotopy class). More formally,\nformula_48\nGiven three based loops formula_49 the product\nformula_50 \nis the concatenation of these loops, traversing formula_39 and then formula_40 with quadruple speed, and then formula_53 with double speed. By comparison,\nformula_54 \ntraverses the same paths (in the same order), but formula_39 with double speed, and formula_56 with quadruple speed. Thus, because of the differing speeds, the two paths are not identical. The associativity axiom\nformula_57\ntherefore crucially depends on the fact that paths are considered up to homotopy. Indeed, both above composites are homotopic, for example, to the loop that traverses all three loops formula_58 with triple speed. The set of based loops up to homotopy, equipped with the above operation therefore does turn formula_34 into a group.\nDependence of the base point.\nAlthough the fundamental group in general depends on the choice of base point, it turns out that, up to isomorphism, this choice makes no difference as long as the space formula_1 is path-connected: more precisely, one obtains an isomorphism by pre- and post-concatenating with a path between the two basepoints. This isomorphism is, in general, not unique: it depends on the choice of path up to homotopy. However changing the path results in changing the isomorphism between the two fundamental groups only by composition with an inner automorphism. It is therefore customary to write formula_2 instead of formula_34 when the choice of basepoint does not matter.\nConcrete examples.\nThis section lists some basic examples of fundamental groups. To begin with, in Euclidean space (formula_63) or any convex subset of formula_64 there is only one homotopy class of loops, and the fundamental group is therefore the trivial group with one element. More generally, any star domain \u2013 and yet more generally, any contractible space \u2013 has a trivial fundamental group. Thus, the fundamental group does not distinguish between such spaces.\nThe 2-sphere.\nA path-connected space whose fundamental group is trivial is called simply connected. \nFor example, the 2-sphere formula_65 depicted on the right, and also all the higher-dimensional spheres, are simply-connected. The figure illustrates a homotopy contracting one particular loop to the constant loop. This idea can be adapted to all loops formula_26 such that there is a point formula_67 that is not in the image of formula_68 However, since there are loops such that formula_69 (constructed from the Peano curve, for example), a complete proof requires more careful analysis with tools from algebraic topology, such as the Seifert\u2013van Kampen theorem or the cellular approximation theorem.\nThe circle.\nThe circle (also known as the 1-sphere)\nformula_70\nis not simply connected. Instead, each homotopy class consists of all loops that wind around the circle a given number of times (which can be positive or negative, depending on the direction of winding). The product of a loop that winds around formula_71 times and another that winds around formula_72 times is a loop that winds around formula_73 times. Therefore, the fundamental group of the circle is isomorphic to formula_74 the additive group of integers. This fact can be used to give proofs of the Brouwer fixed point theorem and the Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem in dimension 2.\nThe figure eight.\nThe fundamental group of the figure eight is the free group on two letters. The idea to prove this is as follows: choosing the base point to be the point where the two circles meet (dotted in black in the picture at the right), any loop formula_26 can be decomposed as\nformula_76\nwhere \"a\" and \"b\" are the two loops winding around each half of the figure as depicted, and the exponents formula_77 are integers. Unlike formula_78 the fundamental group of the figure eight is \"not\" abelian: the two ways of composing formula_79 and formula_80 are not homotopic to each other:\nformula_81\nMore generally, the fundamental group of a bouquet of formula_82 circles is the free group on formula_82 letters.\nThe fundamental group of a wedge sum of two path connected spaces formula_1 and formula_85 can be computed as the free product of the individual fundamental groups:\nformula_86\nThis generalizes the above observations since the figure eight is the wedge sum of two circles.\nThe fundamental group of the plane punctured at formula_72 points is also the free group with formula_72 generators. The formula_89-th generator is the class of the loop that goes around the formula_89-th puncture without going around any other punctures.\nGraphs.\nThe fundamental group can be defined for discrete structures too. In particular, consider a connected graph formula_91, with a designated vertex formula_92 in formula_93. The loops in formula_94 are the cycles that start and end at formula_92. Let formula_96 be a spanning tree of formula_94. Every simple loop in formula_94 contains exactly one edge in formula_99; every loop in formula_94 is a concatenation of such simple loops. Therefore, the fundamental group of a graph is a free group, in which the number of generators is exactly the number of edges in formula_99. This number equals formula_102.\nFor example, suppose formula_94 has 16 vertices arranged in 4 rows of 4 vertices each, with edges connecting vertices that are adjacent horizontally or vertically. Then formula_94 has 24 edges overall, and the number of edges in each spanning tree is 16 \u2212 1 \n 15, so the fundamental group of formula_94 is the free group with 9 generators. Note that formula_94 has 9 \"holes\", similarly to a bouquet of 9 circles, which has the same fundamental group.\nKnot groups.\n\"Knot groups\" are by definition the fundamental group of the complement of a knot formula_107 embedded in formula_108 For example, the knot group of the trefoil knot is known to be the braid group formula_109 which gives another example of a non-abelian fundamental group. The Wirtinger presentation explicitly describes knot groups in terms of generators and relations based on a diagram of the knot. Therefore, knot groups have some usage in knot theory to distinguish between knots: if formula_110 is not isomorphic to some other knot group formula_111 of another knot formula_112, then formula_107 can not be transformed into formula_112. Thus the trefoil knot can not be continuously transformed into the circle (also known as the unknot), since the latter has knot group formula_115. There are, however, knots that can not be deformed into each other, but have isomorphic knot groups.\nOriented surfaces.\nThe fundamental group of a genus-\"n\" orientable surface can be computed in terms of generators and relations as\nformula_116\nThis includes the torus, being the case of genus 1, whose fundamental group is\nformula_117\nTopological groups.\nThe fundamental group of a topological group formula_1 (with respect to the base point being the neutral element) is always commutative. In particular, the fundamental group of a Lie group is commutative. In fact, the group structure on formula_1 endows formula_2 with another group structure: given two loops formula_26 and formula_27 in formula_1, another loop formula_124 can defined by using the group multiplication in formula_1: \nformula_126\nThis binary operation formula_127 on the set of all loops is \"a priori\" independent from the one described above. However, the Eckmann\u2013Hilton argument shows that it does in fact agree with the above concatenation of loops, and moreover that the resulting group structure is abelian.\nAn inspection of the proof shows that, more generally, formula_2 is abelian for any H-space formula_1, i.e., the multiplication need not have an inverse, nor does it have to be associative. For example, this shows that the fundamental group of a loop space of another topological space formula_85, formula_131 is abelian. Related ideas lead to Heinz Hopf's computation of the cohomology of a Lie group.\nFunctoriality.\nIf formula_132 is a continuous map, formula_133 and formula_134 with formula_135 then every loop in formula_1 with base point formula_4 can be composed with formula_138 to yield a loop in formula_85 with base point formula_140 This operation is compatible with the homotopy equivalence relation and with composition of loops. The resulting group homomorphism, called the induced homomorphism, is written as formula_141 or, more commonly,\nformula_142\nThis mapping from continuous maps to group homomorphisms is compatible with composition of maps and identity morphisms. In the parlance of category theory, the formation of associating to a topological space its fundamental group is therefore a functor\nformula_143\nfrom the category of topological spaces together with a base point to the category of groups. It turns out that this functor does not distinguish maps that are homotopic relative to the base point: if formula_144 are continuous maps with formula_145, and formula_138 and formula_147 are homotopic relative to formula_148, then formula_149. As a consequence, two homotopy equivalent path-connected spaces have isomorphic fundamental groups:\nformula_150\nFor example, the inclusion of the circle in the punctured plane\nformula_151\nis a homotopy equivalence and therefore yields an isomorphism of their fundamental groups.\nThe fundamental group functor takes products to products and coproducts to coproducts. That is, if formula_1 and formula_85 are path connected, then\nformula_154\nand if they are also locally contractible, then\nformula_155\n(In the latter formula, formula_156 denotes the wedge sum of pointed topological spaces, and formula_157 the free product of groups.) The latter formula is a special case of the Seifert\u2013van Kampen theorem, which states that the fundamental group functor takes pushouts along inclusions to pushouts.\nAbstract results.\nAs was mentioned above, computing the fundamental group of even relatively simple topological spaces tends to be not entirely trivial, but requires some methods of algebraic topology.\nRelationship to first homology group.\nThe abelianization of the fundamental group can be identified with the first homology group of the space.\nA special case of the Hurewicz theorem asserts that the first singular homology group formula_158 is, colloquially speaking, the closest approximation to the fundamental group by means of an abelian group. In more detail, mapping the homotopy class of each loop to the homology class of the loop gives a group homomorphism\nformula_159\nfrom the fundamental group of a topological space formula_1 to its first singular homology group formula_161 This homomorphism is not in general an isomorphism since the fundamental group may be non-abelian, but the homology group is, by definition, always abelian. This difference is, however, the only one: if formula_1 is path-connected, this homomorphism is surjective and its kernel is the commutator subgroup of the fundamental group, so that formula_158 is isomorphic to the abelianization of the fundamental group.\nGluing topological spaces.\nGeneralizing the statement above, for a family of path connected spaces formula_164 the fundamental group formula_165 is the free product of the fundamental groups of the formula_166 This fact is a special case of the Seifert\u2013van Kampen theorem, which allows to compute, more generally, fundamental groups of spaces that are glued together from other spaces. For example, the 2-sphere formula_167 can be obtained by gluing two copies of slightly overlapping half-spheres along a neighborhood of the equator. In this case the theorem yields formula_168 is trivial, since the two half-spheres are contractible and therefore have trivial fundamental group. The fundamental groups of surfaces, as mentioned above, can also be computed using this theorem.\nIn the parlance of category theory, the theorem can be concisely stated by saying that the fundamental group functor takes pushouts (in the category of topological spaces) along inclusions to pushouts (in the category of groups).\nCoverings.\nGiven a topological space formula_169, a continuous map \nformula_170\nis called a \"covering\" or formula_171 is called a \"covering space\" of formula_169 if every point formula_80 in formula_169 admits an open neighborhood formula_175 such that there is a homeomorphism between the preimage of formula_175 and a disjoint union of copies of formula_175 (indexed by some set formula_178),\nformula_179\nin such a way that formula_180 is the standard projection map formula_181\nUniversal covering.\nA covering is called a universal covering if formula_171 is, in addition to the preceding condition, simply connected. It is universal in the sense that all other coverings can be constructed by suitably identifying points in formula_171. Knowing a universal covering \nformula_184 \nof a topological space formula_1 is helpful in understanding its fundamental group in several ways: first, formula_2 identifies with the group of deck transformations, i.e., the group of homeomorphisms formula_187 that commute with the map to formula_1, i.e., formula_189\nAnother relation to the fundamental group is that formula_190 can be identified with the fiber formula_191 For example, the map\nformula_192\n(or, equivalently, formula_193) is a universal covering. The deck transformations are the maps formula_194 for formula_195 This is in line with the identification formula_196 in particular this proves the above claim formula_197\nAny path connected, locally path connected and locally simply connected topological space formula_1 admits a universal covering. An abstract construction proceeds analogously to the fundamental group by taking pairs formula_199, where formula_200 is a point in formula_1 and formula_26 is a homotopy class of paths from formula_4 to formula_200. The passage from a topological space to its universal covering can be used in understanding the geometry of formula_1. For example, the uniformization theorem shows that any simply connected Riemann surface is (isomorphic to) either formula_206 formula_207 or the upper half-plane. General Riemann surfaces then arise as quotients of group actions on these three surfaces.\nThe quotient of a free action of a discrete group formula_94 on a simply connected space formula_85 has fundamental group \nformula_210\nAs an example, the real formula_72-dimensional real projective space formula_212 is obtained as the quotient of the formula_72-dimensional unit sphere formula_214 by the antipodal action of the group formula_215 sending formula_216 to formula_217 As formula_214 is simply connected for formula_219, it is a universal cover of formula_212 in these cases, which implies formula_221 for formula_219.\nLie groups.\nLet formula_94 be a connected, simply connected compact Lie group, for example, the special unitary group formula_224, and let formula_225 be a finite subgroup of formula_94. Then the homogeneous space formula_227 has fundamental group formula_225, which acts by right multiplication on the universal covering space formula_94. Among the many variants of this construction, one of the most important is given by locally symmetric spaces formula_230, where\nIn this case the fundamental group is formula_225 and the universal covering space formula_237 is actually contractible (by the Cartan decomposition for Lie groups).\nAs an example take formula_238, formula_239 and formula_225 any torsion-free congruence subgroup of the modular group formula_241.\nFrom the explicit realization, it also follows that the universal covering space of a path connected topological group formula_242 is again a path connected topological group formula_94. Moreover, the covering map is a continuous open homomorphism of formula_94 onto formula_242 with kernel formula_225, a closed discrete normal subgroup of formula_94:\nformula_248\nSince formula_94 is a connected group with a continuous action by conjugation on a discrete group formula_225, it must act trivially, so that formula_225 has to be a subgroup of the center of formula_94. In particular formula_253 is an abelian group; this can also easily be seen directly without using covering spaces. The group formula_94 is called the \"universal covering group\" of formula_242.\nAs the universal covering group suggests, there is an analogy between the fundamental group of a topological group and the center of a group; this is elaborated at Lattice of covering groups.\nFibrations.\n\"Fibrations\" provide a very powerful means to compute homotopy groups. A fibration formula_138 the so-called \"total space\", and the base space formula_169 has, in particular, the property that all its fibers formula_258 are homotopy equivalent and therefore can not be distinguished using fundamental groups (and higher homotopy groups), provided that formula_169 is path-connected. Therefore, the space formula_171 can be regarded as a \"twisted product\" of the base space formula_169 and the fiber formula_262 The great importance of fibrations to the computation of homotopy groups stems from a long exact sequence\nformula_263\nprovided that formula_169 is path-connected. The term formula_265 is the second homotopy group of formula_169, which is defined to be the set of homotopy classes of maps from formula_167 to formula_169, in direct analogy with the definition of formula_269\nIf formula_171 happens to be path-connected and simply connected, this sequence reduces to an isomorphism\nformula_271\nwhich generalizes the above fact about the universal covering (which amounts to the case where the fiber formula_272 is also discrete). If instead formula_272 happens to be connected and simply connected, it reduces to an isomorphism\nformula_274\nWhat is more, the sequence can be continued at the left with the higher homotopy groups formula_275 of the three spaces, which gives some access to computing such groups in the same vein.\nClassical Lie groups.\nSuch fiber sequences can be used to inductively compute fundamental groups of compact classical Lie groups such as the special unitary group formula_276 with formula_277 This group acts transitively on the unit sphere formula_278 inside formula_279 The stabilizer of a point in the sphere is isomorphic to formula_280 It then can be shown that this yields a fiber sequence\nformula_281 \nSince formula_282 the sphere formula_278 has dimension at least 3, which implies \nformula_284\nThe long exact sequence then shows an isomorphism\nformula_285\nSince formula_286 is a single point, so that formula_287 is trivial, this shows that formula_288 is simply connected for all formula_289\nThe fundamental group of noncompact Lie groups can be reduced to the compact case, since such a group is homotopic to its maximal compact subgroup. These methods give the following results:\nA second method of computing fundamental groups applies to all connected compact Lie groups and uses the machinery of the maximal torus and the associated root system. Specifically, let formula_96 be a maximal torus in a connected compact Lie group formula_291 and let formula_292 be the Lie algebra of formula_293 The exponential map\nformula_294\nis a fibration and therefore its kernel formula_295 identifies with formula_296 The map\nformula_297\ncan be shown to be surjective with kernel given by the set formula_178 of integer linear combination of coroots. This leads to the computation \nformula_299 \nThis method shows, for example, that any connected compact Lie group for which the associated root system is of type formula_300 is simply connected. Thus, there is (up to isomorphism) only one connected compact Lie group having Lie algebra of type formula_300; this group is simply connected and has trivial center.\nEdge-path group of a simplicial complex.\nWhen the topological space is homeomorphic to a simplicial complex, its fundamental group can be described explicitly in terms of generators and relations.\nIf formula_1 is a connected simplicial complex, an \"edge-path\" in formula_1 is defined to be a chain of vertices connected by edges in formula_1. Two edge-paths are said to be \"edge-equivalent\" if one can be obtained from the other by successively switching between an edge and the two opposite edges of a triangle in formula_1. If formula_306 is a fixed vertex in formula_1, an \"edge-loop\" at formula_306 is an edge-path starting and ending at formula_306. The edge-path group formula_310 is defined to be the set of edge-equivalence classes of edge-loops at formula_306, with product and inverse defined by concatenation and reversal of edge-loops.\nThe edge-path group is naturally isomorphic to formula_312, the fundamental group of the geometric realisation formula_313 of formula_1. Since it depends only on the 2-skeleton formula_315 of formula_1 (that is, the vertices, edges, and triangles of formula_1), the groups formula_312 and formula_319 are isomorphic.\nThe edge-path group can be described explicitly in terms of generators and relations. If formula_96 is a maximal spanning tree in the 1-skeleton of formula_1, then 'formula_310 is canonically isomorphic to the group with generators (the oriented edge-paths of formula_1 not occurring in formula_96) and relations (the edge-equivalences corresponding to triangles in formula_1). A similar result holds if formula_96 is replaced by any simply connected\u2014in particular contractible\u2014subcomplex of formula_1. This often gives a practical way of computing fundamental groups and can be used to show that every finitely presented group arises as the fundamental group of a finite simplicial complex. It is also one of the classical methods used for topological surfaces, which are classified by their fundamental groups.\nThe \"universal covering space\" of a finite connected simplicial complex formula_1 can also be described directly as a simplicial complex using edge-paths. Its vertices are pairs formula_329 where formula_330 is a vertex of formula_1 and \u03b3 is an edge-equivalence class of paths from formula_306 to formula_330. The formula_334-simplices containing formula_329 correspond naturally to the formula_334-simplices containing formula_330. Each new vertex formula_338 of the formula_334-simplex gives an edge formula_340 and hence, by concatenation, a new path formula_341 from formula_306 to formula_338. The points formula_329 and formula_345 are the vertices of the \"transported\" simplex in the universal covering space. The edge-path group acts naturally by concatenation, preserving the simplicial structure, and the quotient space is just formula_1.\nIt is well known that this method can also be used to compute the fundamental group of an arbitrary topological space. This was doubtless known to Eduard \u010cech and Jean Leray and explicitly appeared as a remark in a paper by Andr\u00e9 Weil; various other authors such as Lorenzo Calabi, Wu Wen-ts\u00fcn, and Nodar Berikashvili have also published proofs. In the simplest case of a compact space formula_1 with a finite open covering in which all non-empty finite intersections of open sets in the covering are contractible, the fundamental group can be identified with the edge-path group of the simplicial complex corresponding to the nerve of the covering.\nRelated concepts.\nHigher homotopy groups.\nRoughly speaking, the fundamental group detects the 1-dimensional hole structure of a space, but not higher-dimensional holes such as for the 2-sphere. Such \"higher-dimensional holes\" can be detected using the higher homotopy groups formula_348, which are defined to consist of homotopy classes of (basepoint-preserving) maps from formula_214 to formula_1. For example, the Hurewicz theorem implies that for all formula_351 the formula_72-th homotopy group of the \"n\"-sphere is\nformula_353 \nAs was mentioned in the above computation of formula_354 of classical Lie groups, higher homotopy groups can be relevant even for computing fundamental groups.\nLoop space.\nThe set of based loops (as is, i.e. not taken up to homotopy) in a pointed space formula_1, endowed with the compact open topology, is known as the loop space, denoted formula_356 The fundamental group of formula_1 is in bijection with the set of path components of its loop space:\nformula_358\nFundamental groupoid.\nThe \"fundamental groupoid\" is a variant of the fundamental group that is useful in situations where the choice of a base point formula_133 is undesirable. It is defined by first considering the category of paths in formula_360 i.e., continuous functions\nformula_361,\nwhere formula_82 is an arbitrary non-negative real number. Since the length formula_82 is variable in this approach, such paths can be concatenated as is (i.e., not up to homotopy) and therefore yield a category. Two such paths formula_364 with the same endpoints and length formula_82, resp. formula_82' are considered equivalent if there exist real numbers formula_367 such that formula_368 and formula_369 are homotopic relative to their end points, where formula_370\nThe category of paths up to this equivalence relation is denoted formula_371 Each morphism in formula_372 is an isomorphism, with inverse given by the same path traversed in the opposite direction. Such a category is called a groupoid. It reproduces the fundamental group since\nformula_373.\nMore generally, one can consider the fundamental groupoid on a set formula_374 of base points, chosen according to the geometry of the situation; for example, in the case of the circle, which can be represented as the union of two connected open sets whose intersection has two components, one can choose one base point in each component. The van Kampen theorem admits a version for fundamental groupoids which gives, for example, another way to compute the fundamental group(oid) of formula_375\nLocal systems.\nGenerally speaking, representations may serve to exhibit features of a group by its actions on other mathematical objects, often vector spaces. Representations of the fundamental group have a very geometric significance: any \"local system\" (i.e., a sheaf formula_376 on formula_1 with the property that locally in a sufficiently small neighborhood formula_175 of any point on formula_1, the restriction of formula_272 is a constant sheaf of the form formula_381) gives rise to the so-called monodromy representation, a representation of the fundamental group on an formula_72-dimensional formula_383-vector space. Conversely, any such representation on a path-connected space formula_1 arises in this manner. This equivalence of categories between representations of formula_2 and local systems is used, for example, in the study of differential equations, such as the Knizhnik\u2013Zamolodchikov equations.\n\u00c9tale fundamental group.\nIn algebraic geometry, the so-called \u00e9tale fundamental group is used as a replacement for the fundamental group. Since the Zariski topology on an algebraic variety or scheme formula_1 is much coarser than, say, the topology of open subsets in formula_64 it is no longer meaningful to consider continuous maps from an interval to formula_1. Instead, the approach developed by Grothendieck consists in constructing formula_389 by considering all finite \u00e9tale covers of formula_1. These serve as an algebro-geometric analogue of coverings with finite fibers.\nThis yields a theory applicable in situations where no great generality classical topological intuition whatsoever is available, for example for varieties defined over a finite field. Also, the \u00e9tale fundamental group of a field is its (absolute) Galois group. On the other hand, for smooth varieties formula_1 over the complex numbers, the \u00e9tale fundamental group retains much of the information inherent in the classical fundamental group: the former is the profinite completion of the latter.\nFundamental group of algebraic groups.\nThe fundamental group of a root system is defined in analogy to the computation for Lie groups. This allows to define and use the fundamental group of a semisimple linear algebraic group formula_94, which is a useful basic tool in the classification of linear algebraic groups.\nFundamental group of simplicial sets.\nThe homotopy relation between 1-simplices of a simplicial set formula_1 is an equivalence relation if formula_1 is a Kan complex but not necessarily so in general. Thus, formula_354 of a Kan complex can be defined as the set of homotopy classes of 1-simplices. The fundamental group of an arbitrary simplicial set formula_1 are defined to be the homotopy group of its topological realization, formula_397 i.e., the topological space obtained by gluing topological simplices as prescribed by the simplicial set structure of formula_1.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11006", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11006", "title": "February 19", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearFebruary 19 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11007", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11007", "title": "February 24", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearFebruary 24 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11008", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11008", "title": "February 23", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearFebruary 23 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11009", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11009", "title": "February 22", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearFebruary 22 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11010", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11010", "title": "February 21", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearFebruary 21 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11011", "revid": "47555821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11011", "title": "FBI (disambiguation)", "text": "FBI is the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the United States.\nFBI may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11012", "revid": "1319682124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11012", "title": "Forth (programming language)", "text": "Stack-based programming language\nForth is a stack-oriented programming language and interactive integrated development environment designed by Charles H. \"Chuck\" Moore and first used by other programmers in 1970. Although not an acronym, the language's name in its early years was often spelled in all capital letters as \"FORTH\". The FORTH-79 and FORTH-83 implementations, which were not written by Moore, became \"de facto\" standards, and an official technical standard of the language was published in 1994 as ANS Forth. A wide range of Forth derivatives existed before and after ANS Forth. The free and open-source software Gforth implementation is actively maintained, as are several commercially supported systems.\nForth typically combines a compiler with an integrated command shell, where the user interacts via subroutines called \"words\".\nWords can be defined, tested, redefined, and debugged without recompiling or restarting the whole program. All syntactic elements, including variables, operators, and control flow, are defined as words. A stack is used to pass parameters between words, leading to a Reverse Polish notation style.\nFor much of Forth's existence, the standard technique was to compile to threaded code, which can be interpreted faster than bytecode. One of the early benefits of Forth was size: an entire development environment\u2014including compiler, editor, and user programs\u2014could fit in memory on an 8-bit or similarly limited system. No longer constrained by space, there are modern implementations that generate optimized machine code like other language compilers.\nThe relative simplicity of creating a basic Forth system has led to many personal and proprietary variants, such as the custom Forth used to implement the bestselling 1986 video game \"Starflight\" from Electronic Arts. Forth is used in the Open Firmware boot loader, in spaceflight applications such as the \"Philae\" spacecraft, and in other embedded systems which involve interaction with hardware. \nBeginning in the early 1980s, Moore developed a series of microprocessors for executing compiled Forth-like code directly and experimented with smaller languages based on Forth concepts, including cmForth and colorForth. Most of these languages were created to support Moore's own projects, such as chip design.\nUses.\nForth has a niche in astronomical and space applications as well as a history in embedded systems. The Open Firmware boot ROMs used by Apple, IBM, Sun, and OLPC XO-1 contain a Forth environment.\nForth has often been used to bring up new hardware. Forth was the first resident software on the new Intel 8086 chip in 1978, and MacFORTH was the first resident development system for the Macintosh 128K in 1984.\nCirca 1982, Atari, Inc. used an elaborate animated demo written in Forth to showcase capabilities of the Atari 8-bit computers in department stores. Electronic Arts published multiple video games in the 1980s that were written in Forth, including \"Worms?\" (1983), \"Adventure Construction Set\" (1984), \"Amnesia\" (1986), \"Starflight\" (1986), and \"Lords of Conquest\" (1986). Robot coding game \"ChipWits\" (1984) was developed in MacFORTH for the Macintosh 128K, while the Commodore 64 port was written with SuperForth 64.\nAshton-Tate's RapidFile (1986), a flat-file database program, and VP-Planner from Paperback Software International (1983), a spreadsheet program competing with Lotus 1-2-3, were written in Forth.\nThe Canon Cat (1987) uses Forth for its system programming.\nRockwell produced single-chip microcomputers with resident Forth kernels: the R65F11 and R65F12.\nASYST was a Forth expansion for measuring and controlling on PCs.\nHistory.\nForth evolved from Charles H. Moore's personal programming system, which had been in continuous development since 1968. Forth was first exposed to other programmers in the early 1970s, starting with Elizabeth Rather at the United States National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO). After their work at NRAO, Charles Moore and Elizabeth Rather formed FORTH, Inc. in 1973, refining and porting Forth systems to dozens of other platforms in the next decade.\nMoore saw Forth as a successor to compile-link-go third-generation programming languages, or software for \"fourth generation\" hardware. He recalls how the name was coined: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At Mohasco [\"in the late 1960s\"] I also worked directly on an IBM 1130 interfaced with an IBM 2250 graphics display. The 1130 was a very important computer: it had the first cartridge disk, as well as a card reader, a card punch (as backup for the disk), and a console typewriter. The 1130 let the programmer, for the first time, totally control the computer interactively.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;FORTH first appeared as an entity on that 1130. It was called F-O-R-T-H, a five-letter abbreviation of FOURTH, standing for fourth-generation computer language. That was the day, you may remember, of third-generation computers and I was going to leapfrog. But because FORTH ran on the 1130 (which permitted only five-character identifiers), the name was shortened.\nFORTH, Inc.'s microFORTH was developed for the Intel 8080, Motorola 6800, Zilog Z80, and RCA 1802 microprocessors, starting in 1976. MicroFORTH was later used by hobbyists to generate Forth systems for other architectures, such as the 6502 in 1978. The Forth Interest Group was formed in 1978. It promoted and distributed its own version of the language, FIG-Forth, for most makes of home computer.\nForth was popular in the early 1980s, because it was well suited to the limited memory of microcomputers. The ease of implementing the language led to many implementations. The Jupiter ACE home computer has Forth in its ROM-resident operating system. Insoft GraFORTH is a version of Forth with graphics extensions for the Apple II.\nCommon practice was codified in the de facto standards FORTH-79 and FORTH-83 in the years 1979 and 1983, respectively. These standards were unified by ANSI in 1994, commonly referred to as ANS Forth.\nAs of 2018, the source for the original 1130 version of FORTH has been recovered, and is now being updated to run on a restored or emulated 1130 system.\nOverview.\nForth emphasizes the use of small, simple functions called \"words\". Words for bigger tasks call upon many smaller words that each accomplish a distinct sub-task. A large Forth program is a hierarchy of words. These words, being distinct modules that communicate implicitly via a stack mechanism, can be prototyped, built and tested independently. The highest level of Forth code may resemble an English-language description of the application. Forth has been called a \"meta-application language\": a language that can be used to create problem-oriented languages.\nForth relies on implicit use of a data stack and reverse Polish notation which is commonly used in calculators from Hewlett-Packard. In RPN, the operator is placed after its operands, as opposed to the more common infix notation where the operator is placed between its operands. Postfix notation makes the language easier to parse and extend; Forth's flexibility makes a static BNF grammar inappropriate, and it does not have a monolithic compiler. Extending the compiler only requires writing a new word, instead of modifying a grammar and changing the underlying implementation.\nUsing RPN, one can compute the value of the arithmetic expression (25 \u00d7 10) + 50 in the following way:\n 25 10 * 50 + CR .\n 300 ok\nFirst the numbers 25 and 10 are put on the stack.\nThe word codice_1 takes the top two numbers from the stack, multiplies them, and puts the product back on the stack.\nThen the number 50 is placed on the stack.\nThe word codice_2 takes the top two numbers from the stack, adds them, and puts the sum back on the stack. codice_3 (carriage return) starts the output on a new line. Finally, codice_4 prints the result. As everything has completed successfully, the Forth system prints codice_5.\nEven Forth's structural features are stack-based. For example:\n : FLOOR5 ( n -- n' ) DUP 6 &lt; IF DROP 5 ELSE 1 - THEN ;\nThe colon indicates the beginning of a new definition, in this case a new word (again, \"word\" is the term used for a subroutine) called codice_6. The text in parentheses is a comment, advising that this word expects a number on the stack and will return a possibly changed number (on the stack).\nThe subroutine uses the following commands: codice_7 duplicates the number on the stack; codice_8 pushes a 6 on top of the stack; codice_9 compares the top two numbers on the stack (6 and the codice_7ed input), and replaces them with a true-or-false value; codice_11 takes a true-or-false value and chooses to execute commands immediately after it or to skip to the codice_12; codice_13 discards the value on the stack; codice_14 pushes a 5 on top of the stack; and codice_15 ends the conditional.\nThe codice_6 word is equivalent to this function written in the C programming language using the '?:'\nint floor5(int v) {\n return (v &lt; 6) ? 5 : (v - 1);\nThis function is written more succinctly as:\n : FLOOR5 ( n -- n' ) 1- 5 MAX ;\nThis can be run as follows:\n 1 FLOOR5 CR .\n 5 ok\n 8 FLOOR5 CR .\n 7 ok\nFirst a number (1 or 8) is pushed onto the stack, codice_6 is called, which pops the number again and pushes the result. codice_3 moves the output to a new line (again, this is only here for readability). Finally, a call to codice_4 pops the result and prints.\nFacilities.\nForth's grammar has no official specification. Instead, it is defined by a simple algorithm. The interpreter reads a line of input from the user input device, which is then parsed for a word using spaces as a delimiter; some systems recognise additional whitespace characters. When the interpreter finds a word, it looks the word up in the \"dictionary\". If the word is found, the interpreter executes the code associated with the word, and then returns to parse the rest of the input stream. If the word isn't found, the word is assumed to be a number and an attempt is made to convert it into a number and push it on the stack; if successful, the interpreter continues parsing the input stream. Otherwise, if both the lookup and the number conversion fail, the interpreter prints the word followed by an error message indicating that the word is not recognised, flushes the input stream, and waits for new user input.\nThe definition of a new word is started with the word codice_20 (colon) and ends with the word codice_21 (semi-colon). For example,\n : X DUP 1+ . . ;\nwill compile the word codice_22, and makes the name findable in the dictionary. When executed by typing codice_23 at the console this will print codice_24.\nMost Forth systems include an assembler to write words using the processor's facilities. Forth assemblers often use a reverse Polish syntax in which the parameters of an instruction precede the instruction. A typical reverse Polish assembler prepares the operands on the stack and the mnemonic copies the whole instruction into memory as the last step. A Forth assembler is by nature a macro assembler, so that it is easy to define an alias for registers according to their role in the Forth system: e.g. \"dsp\" for the register used as the data stack pointer.\nOperating system, files, and multitasking.\nMost Forth systems run under a host operating system such as Microsoft Windows, Linux or a version of Unix and use the host operating system's file system for source and data files; the ANSI Forth Standard describes the words used for I/O. All modern Forth systems use normal text files for source, even if they are embedded. An embedded system with a resident compiler gets its source via a serial line.\nClassic Forth systems traditionally use neither operating system nor file system. Instead of storing code in files, source code is stored in disk blocks written to physical disk addresses. The word codice_25 is employed to translate the number of a 1K-sized block of disk space into the address of a buffer containing the data, which is managed automatically by the Forth system. Block use has become rare since the mid-1990s. In a hosted system those blocks too are allocated in a normal file in any case.\nMultitasking, most commonly cooperative round-robin scheduling, is normally available (although multitasking words and support are not covered by the ANSI Forth Standard). The word codice_26 is used to save the current task's execution context, to locate the next task, and restore its execution context. Each task has its own stacks, private copies of some control variables and a scratch area. Swapping tasks is simple and efficient; as a result, Forth multitaskers are available even on very simple microcontrollers, such as the Intel 8051, Atmel AVR, and TI MSP430.\nOther non-standard facilities include a mechanism for issuing calls to the host OS or windowing systems, and many provide extensions that employ the scheduling provided by the operating system. Typically they have a larger and different set of words from the stand-alone Forth's codice_26 word for task creation, suspension, destruction and modification of priority.\nSelf-compilation and cross compilation.\nA full-featured Forth system with all source code will compile itself, a technique commonly called meta-compilation or self-hosting, by Forth programmers (although the term doesn't exactly match meta-compilation as it is normally defined). The usual method is to redefine the handful of words that place compiled bits into memory. The compiler's words use specially named versions of fetch and store that can be redirected to a buffer area in memory. The buffer area simulates or accesses a memory area beginning at a different address than the code buffer. Such compilers define words to access both the target computer's memory, and the host (compiling) computer's memory.\nAfter the fetch and store operations are redefined for the code space, the compiler, assembler, etc. are recompiled using the new definitions of fetch and store. This effectively reuses all the code of the compiler and interpreter. Then, the Forth system's code is compiled, but this version is stored in the buffer. The buffer in memory is written to disk, and ways are provided to load it temporarily into memory for testing. When the new version appears to work, it is written over the previous version.\nNumerous variations of such compilers exist for different environments. For embedded systems, the code may instead be written to another computer, a technique known as cross compilation, over a serial port or even a single TTL bit, while keeping the word names and other non-executing parts of the dictionary in the original compiling computer. The minimum definitions for such a Forth compiler are the words that fetch and store a byte, and the word that commands a Forth word to be executed. Often the most time-consuming part of writing a remote port is constructing the initial program to implement fetch, store and execute, but many modern microprocessors have integrated debugging features (such as the Motorola CPU32) that eliminate this task.\nStructure of the language.\nThe basic data structure of Forth is the \"dictionary\" which maps \"words\" to executable code or named data structures. The dictionary is laid out in memory as a tree of linked lists with the links proceeding from the latest (most recently) defined word to the oldest, until a sentinel value, usually a NULL pointer, is found. A context switch causes a list search to start at a different leaf. A linked list search continues as the branch merges into the main trunk leading eventually back to the sentinel, the root.\nThere can be several dictionaries. In rare cases such as meta-compilation a dictionary might be isolated and stand-alone.\nThe effect resembles that of nesting namespaces and can overload keywords depending on the context.\nA defined word generally consists of \"head\" and \"body\" with the head consisting of the \"name field\" (NF) and the \"link field\" (LF), and body consisting of the \"code field\" (CF) and the \"parameter field\" (PF).\nHead and body of a dictionary entry are treated separately because they may not be contiguous. For example, when a Forth program is recompiled for a new platform, the head may remain on the compiling computer, while the body goes to the new platform. In some environments (such as embedded systems) the heads occupy memory unnecessarily. However, some cross-compilers may put heads in the target if the target itself is expected to support an interactive Forth.\nThe exact format of a dictionary entry is not prescribed, and implementations vary.\nStructure of the compiler.\nThe compiler itself is not a monolithic program. It consists of Forth words visible to the system, and usable by a programmer. This allows a programmer to change the compiler's words for special purposes. Compilation in traditional Forth systems is straightforward and does not involve building and optimizing an abstract representation of the code. (Some newer Forth compilers use more elaborate compilation methods, as common in other languages.)\nThe \"compile time\" flag in the name field is set for words with \"compile time\" behavior. Most simple words execute the same code whether they are typed on a command line, or embedded in code. When compiling these, the compiler simply places code or a threaded pointer to the word.\nThe classic examples of compile-time words are the control structures such as codice_11 and codice_29. Almost all of Forth's control structures and almost all of its compiler are implemented as compile-time words. Apart from some rarely used control flow words only found in a few implementations, such as the conditional return word codice_30 used in Ulrich Hoffmann's preForth, all of Forth's control flow words are executed during compilation to compile various combinations of primitive words along with their branch addresses.\nFor instance, codice_11 and codice_29, and the words that match with those, set up codice_33 (unconditional branch) and codice_34 (pop a value off the stack, and branch if it is false). Counted loop control flow words work similarly but set up combinations of primitive words that work with a counter, and so on. During compilation, the data stack is used to support control structure balancing, nesting, and back-patching of branch addresses. The snippet:\n ... DUP 6 &lt; IF DROP 5 ELSE 1 - THEN ...\nwould often be compiled to the following sequence inside a definition:\n ... DUP LIT 6 &lt; ?BRANCH 5 DROP LIT 5 BRANCH 3 LIT 1 - ...\nThe numbers after codice_33 represent relative jump addresses. codice_36 is the primitive word for pushing a \"literal\" number onto the data stack. (Faster, shorter code would be compiled using pointers to constants instead of codice_36 and embedded data, if any of the numbers involved have been separately defined as constants. There would be similar changes if yet other words were used instead of constants, and so on.)\nCompilation state and interpretation state.\nThe word codice_20 (colon) parses a name as a parameter, creates a dictionary entry (a \"colon definition\") and enters compilation state. The interpreter continues to read space-delimited words from the user input device. If a word is found, the interpreter executes the \"compilation semantics\" associated with the word, instead of the \"interpretation semantics\". The default compilation semantics of a word are to append its interpretation semantics to the current definition.\nThe word codice_21 (semi-colon) finishes the current definition and returns to interpretation state. It is an example of a word whose compilation semantics differ from the default. The interpretation semantics of codice_21 (semi-colon), most control flow words, and several other words are undefined in ANS Forth, meaning that they must only be used inside of definitions and not on the interactive command line.\nThe interpreter state can be changed manually with the words codice_41 (left-bracket) and codice_42 (right-bracket) which enter interpretation state or compilation state, respectively. These words can be used with the word codice_43 to calculate a value during a compilation and to insert the calculated value into the current colon definition. codice_43 has the compilation semantics to take an object from the data stack and to append semantics to the current colon definition to place that object on the data stack.\nIn ANS Forth, the current state of the interpreter can be read from the flag codice_45 which contains the value true when in compilation state and false otherwise. This allows the implementation of so-called \"state-smart words\" with behavior that changes according to the current state of the interpreter.\nImmediate words.\nThe word codice_46 marks the most recent colon definition as an \"immediate word\", effectively replacing its compilation semantics with its interpretation semantics. Immediate words are normally executed during compilation, not compiled, but this can be overridden by the programmer in either state. codice_21 is an example of an immediate word. In ANS Forth, the word codice_48 takes a name as a parameter and appends the compilation semantics of the named word to the current definition even if the word was marked immediate. Forth-83 defined separate words codice_49 and codice_50 to force the compilation of non-immediate and immediate words, respectively.\nInstead of reserving space for an Immediate flag in every definition, some implementations of Forth use an Immediates Dictionary which is checked first when in compile mode.\nUnnamed words and execution tokens.\nIn ANS Forth, unnamed words can be defined with the word codice_51 which compiles the following words up to the next codice_21 (semi-colon) and leaves an \"execution token\" on the data stack. The execution token provides an opaque handle for the compiled semantics, similar to the function pointers of the C programming language.\nExecution tokens can be stored in variables. The word codice_53 takes an execution token from the data stack and performs the associated semantics. The word codice_54 (compile-comma) takes an execution token from the data stack and appends the associated semantics to the current definition.\nThe word codice_55 (tick) takes the name of a word as a parameter and returns the execution token associated with that word on the data stack. In interpretation state, codice_56 is equivalent to codice_57.\nParsing words and comments.\nThe words codice_20 (colon), codice_48, codice_55 (tick) are examples of \"parsing words\" that take their arguments from the user input device instead of the data stack. Another example is the word codice_61 (paren) which reads and ignores the following words up to and including the next right parenthesis and is used to place comments in a colon definition. Similarly, the word codice_62 (backslash) is used for comments that continue to the end of the current line. To be parsed correctly, codice_61 (paren) and codice_62 (backslash) must be separated by whitespace from the following comment text.\nStructure of code.\nIn most Forth systems, the body of a code definition consists of either machine language, or some form of threaded code. The original Forth which follows the informal FIG standard (Forth Interest Group), is a TIL (Threaded Interpretive Language). This is also called indirect-threaded code, but direct-threaded and subroutine threaded Forths have also become popular in modern times. The fastest modern Forths, such as SwiftForth, VFX Forth, and iForth, compile Forth to native machine code.\nData objects.\nWhen a word is a variable or other data object, the CF points to the runtime code associated with the defining word that created it. A defining word has a characteristic \"defining behavior\" (creating a dictionary entry plus possibly allocating and initializing data space) and also specifies the behavior of an instance of the class of words constructed by this defining word. Examples include:\nNames an uninitialized, one-cell memory location. Instance behavior of a codice_65 returns its address on the stack.\nNames a value (specified as an argument to codice_67). Instance behavior returns the value.\nNames a location; space may be allocated at this location, or it can be set to contain a string or other initialized value. Instance behavior returns the address of the beginning of this space.\nForth also provides a facility by which a programmer can define new application-specific defining words, specifying both a custom defining behavior and instance behavior. Some examples include circular buffers, named bits on an I/O port, and automatically indexed arrays.\nData objects defined by these and similar words are global in scope. The function provided by local variables in other languages is provided by the data stack in Forth (although Forth also has real local variables). Forth programming style uses very few named data objects compared with other languages; typically such data objects are used to contain data which is used by a number of words or tasks (in a multitasked implementation).\nForth does not enforce consistency of data type usage; it is the programmer's responsibility to use appropriate operators to fetch and store values or perform other operations on data.\nExamples.\n\u201cHello, World!\u201d.\n : HELLO ( -- ) CR .\" Hello, World!\" ;\n HELLO &lt;cr&gt;\n Hello, World!\nThe word codice_3 (Carriage Return) causes the output following codice_3 \nto be displayed on a new line. The parsing word codice_72 (dot-quote) reads a double-quote delimited string and appends code to the current definition so that the parsed string will be displayed upon execution. The space character separating the word codice_72 from the string codice_74 is not included as part of the string. It is needed so that the parser recognizes codice_72 as a Forth word.\nA standard Forth system is also an interpreter, and the same output can be obtained by typing the following code fragment into the Forth console:\n CR .( Hello, World!)\ncodice_76 (dot-paren) is an immediate word that parses a parenthesis-delimited string and displays it. As with the word codice_72 the space character separating codice_76 from codice_74 is not part of the string.\nThe word codice_3 comes before the text to print. By convention, the Forth interpreter does not start output on a new line. Also by convention, the interpreter waits for input at the end of the previous line, after an codice_81 prompt. There is no implied \"flush-buffer\" action in Forth's codice_3, as sometimes is in other programming languages.\nMixing states of compiling and interpreting.\nHere is the definition of a word codice_83 which when executed emits the single character codice_84:\n : EMIT-Q 81 ( the ASCII value for the character 'Q' ) EMIT ;\nThis definition was written to use the ASCII value of the codice_84 character (81) directly. The text between the parentheses is a comment and is ignored by the compiler. The word codice_86 takes a value from the data stack and displays the corresponding character.\nThe following redefinition of codice_83 uses the words codice_41 (left-bracket), codice_42 (right-bracket), codice_90 and codice_43 to temporarily switch to interpreter state, calculate the ASCII value of the codice_84 character, return to compilation state and append the calculated value to the current colon definition:\n : EMIT-Q [ CHAR Q ] LITERAL EMIT ;\nThe parsing word codice_90 takes a space-delimited word as parameter and places the value of its first character on the data stack. The word codice_94 is an immediate version of codice_90. Using codice_94, the example definition for codice_83 could be rewritten like this:\n : EMIT-Q [CHAR] Q EMIT ; \\ Emit the single character 'Q'\nThis definition used codice_62 (backslash) for the describing comment.\nBoth codice_90 and codice_94 are predefined in ANS Forth. Using codice_46 and codice_48, codice_94 could have been defined like this:\n : [CHAR] CHAR POSTPONE LITERAL ; IMMEDIATE\nRC4 cipher program.\nIn 1987, Ron Rivest developed the RC4 cipher-system for RSA Data Security, Inc. Its description follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We have an array of 256 bytes, all different. Every time the array is used it changes by swapping two bytes. The swaps are controlled by counters \"i\" and \"j\", each initially 0. To get a new \"i\", add 1. To get a new \"j\", add the array byte at the new \"i\". Exchange the array bytes at \"i\" and \"j\". The code is the array byte at the sum of the array bytes at \"i\" and \"j\". This is XORed with a byte of the plaintext to encrypt, or the ciphertext to decrypt. The array is initialized by first setting it to 0 through 255. Then step through it using \"i\" and \"j\", getting the new \"j\" by adding to it the array byte at \"i\" and a key byte, and swapping the array bytes at \"i\" and \"j\". Finally, \"i\" and \"j\" are set to 0. All additions are modulo 256.\nThe following Standard Forth version uses Core and Core Extension words only.\n0 value ii 0 value jj\n0 value KeyAddr 0 value KeyLen\ncreate SArray 256 allot \\ state array of 256 bytes\n KeyArray KeyLen mod KeyAddr ;\n get_byte + c@ ;\n set_byte + c! ;\n as_byte 255 and ;\n reset_ij 0 TO ii 0 TO jj ;\n i_update 1 + as_byte TO ii ;\n j_update ii SArray get_byte + as_byte TO jj ;\n swap_s_ij\n jj SArray get_byte\n ii SArray get_byte jj SArray set_byte\n ii SArray set_byte\n rc4_init ( KeyAddr KeyLen -- )\n 256 min TO KeyLen TO KeyAddr\n 256 0 DO i i SArray set_byte LOOP\n reset_ij\n BEGIN\n ii KeyArray get_byte jj + j_update\n swap_s_ij\n ii 255 &lt; WHILE\n ii i_update\n REPEAT\n reset_ij\n rc4_byte\n ii i_update jj j_update\n swap_s_ij\n ii SArray get_byte jj SArray get_byte + as_byte SArray get_byte xor\nThis is one way to test the code:\nhex\ncreate AKey 61 c, 8A c, 63 c, D2 c, FB c,\n test cr 0 DO rc4_byte . LOOP cr ;\nAKey 5 rc4_init\n2C F9 4C EE DC 5 test \\ output should be: F1 38 29 C9 DE\nForth engines.\nA processor designed to support a specific programming language is called a language \"engine\".\nForth engines are hardware platforms specifically designed to support developing and running programs written in Forth. (Likewise, Lisp machines were specifically designed to support developing and running programs written in Lisp, the Pascal MicroEngine was specifically designed to support developing and running programs written in Pascal, etc.).\nThe first commercially available single-chip Forth engine was the Rockwell R65F11,\na chip that includes a Forth kernel in ROM,\nan enhanced 6502, SRAM, and various interface circuits that previously required peripheral chips.\nMany other commercial CPUs (Harris RTX-2000, Novix NC4016, F21, MARC4, KimKlone, etc.) and many homebrew CPUs (My4TH, J1, H2, Mark 1 FORTH Computer, etc.) are specifically designed to run Forth. Typically they implement common Forth primitives such as the \"Forth NEXT\" as single instructions.\nImplementations.\nBecause Forth is simple to implement and has no standard reference implementation, there are numerous versions of the language. In addition to supporting the standard varieties of desktop computer systems (POSIX, Microsoft Windows, macOS), many of these Forth systems also target a variety of embedded systems. Listed here are some of the systems which conform to the 1994 ANS Forth standard.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11013", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11013", "title": "Ferdinand Saussure", "text": ""}
{"id": "11014", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11014", "title": "Famous Scotsmen", "text": ""}
{"id": "11015", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11015", "title": "Francesco Algarotti", "text": "Italian polymath (1712\u20131764)\nCount Francesco Algarotti (11 December 1712 \u2013 3 May 1764) was an Italian polymath, philosopher, poet, essayist, anglophile, art critic and art collector. He was a man of broad knowledge, an expert in Newtonianism, architecture and opera. He was a friend of Frederick the Great and leading authors of his times: Voltaire, Jean-Baptiste de Boyer, Marquis d'Argens, Pierre-Louis de Maupertuis and the atheist Julien Offray de La Mettrie. Lord Chesterfield, Thomas Gray, George Lyttelton, Thomas Hollis, Metastasio, Benedict XIV and Heinrich von Br\u00fchl were among his correspondents.\nEarly life.\nAlgarotti was born in Venice as the son of a rich merchant. His father and uncle were art collectors. Unlike his older brother, Bonomo he did not step into the company, but decided to become an author. Francesco obtained a classical education. He also studied natural sciences and mathematics at the Rome and experimental physics and medicine at the University of Bologna under Francesco Maria Zanotti who became a lifelong friend. In 1728, he conducted experiments regarding optics. He was educated in his native Venice and in Rome and Bologna. \nHis youthful curiosity led him to travel extensively, and he visited Paris for the first time in his early 20s. There his urbanity, his brilliant conversation, his good looks, and his versatile intelligence promptly made an impression on such intellectuals as Pierre-Louis Moreau de Maupertuis and Voltaire. Two years later, he was in London, where he was made a fellow of the Royal Society. He became embroiled in a lively bisexual love-triangle with the politician John Hervey, and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. Algarotti left for Italy and finished his \"Neutonianismo per le dame\" (\"Newtonism for Ladies\") (1737 \u2013 dedicated to Bernard le Bovier de Fontenelle) \u2013 a work consisting of information on astronomy, physics, mathematics, women and science and education.\nPersonal life and career.\nAlgarotti had made acquaintance with Antiochus Kantemir, a Moldavian diplomat, poet and composer. He was invited to visit Russia for the wedding of Duke Anthony Ulrich of Brunswick. In 1739 he left with Lord Baltimore from Sheerness to Newcastle upon Tyne. On their way to Saint Petersburg a heavy storm forced their ship to shelter in Harlingen. Algarotti called Saint Petersburg \"the great window ... through which Russia looks into Europe\". Returning from Saint Petersburg, they visited Frederick the Great in Rheinsberg. Algarotti had obligations in England and came back the year after. Then Algarotti went together with Frederick to K\u00f6nigsberg where he was crowned.\nFrederick, who was impressed with this walking encyclopedia, made him and his brother Bonomo Prussian counts in 1740. Algarotti accompanied Frederick to Bayreuth, Kehl, Strasbourg and Moyland Castle where they met with Voltaire, who was taking baths in Kleve for his health. In 1741 Algarotti went to Turin as his diplomat. Frederick had offered him a salary, but Algarotti refused. First, he went to Dresden and Venice, where he bought 21 paintings, a few by Jean-\u00c9tienne Liotard and Giovanni Battista Tiepolo for the court of Augustus III of Poland. Algarotti did not succeed in inducing the Kingdom of Sardinia to launch a treacherous attack upon Austria.\nAlgarotti and the other arts.\nAlgarotti's choice of works reflects the encyclopedic interests of the Neoclassic era; he was uninterested in developing a single unitary stylistic collection, and envisioned a modern museum, a catalog of styles from across the ages. For contemporary commissions, he wrote up a list of paintings he recommended commissioning, including history paintings from Tiepolo, Pittoni, and Piazzetta; scenes with animals from Castiglione, and veduta with ruins from Pannini. He wanted \"suggetti graziosi e leggeri\" from Balestra, Boucher, and Donato Creti. Other artists he supported were Giuseppe Nogari, Bernardo Bellotto, and Francesco Pavona.\nIn 1747 Algarotti went back to Potsdam and became court chamberlain, but left to visit the archeological diggings at Herculaneum. In 1749 he moved to Berlin. Algarotti was involved in finishing the architectural designs of Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff who had fallen ill. In February 1753, after several years residing in Prussia, he returned to Italy, living most of the time in Bologna, where he was friendly with Laura Bassi, the first salaried female teacher in a university. In 1759 Algarotti was involved in a new opera-style in the city of Parma. He influenced Guillaume du Tillot and the Duke of Parma.\nAlgarotti's \"Essay on the Opera\" (1755) was a major influence on the librettist Carlo Innocenzo Frugoni and the composer Tommaso Traetta, and in the development of Gluck's reformist ideology. Algarotti proposed a heavily simplified model of \"opera seria\", with the drama pre-eminent, instead of the music, ballet or staging. The drama itself should \"delight the eyes and ears, to rouse up and to affect the hearts of an audience, without the risk of sinning against reason or common sense.\" Algarotti's ideas influenced both Gluck and his librettist Calzabigi, writing their \"Orfeo ed Euridice\".\nIn 1762 Algarotti moved to Pisa, where he died of tuberculosis. Frederick the Great, who several times had needed Algarotti for writing texts in Latin, sent in a text for a monument to his memory on the Campo Santo.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11016", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11016", "title": "Francisco \u00c1lvares", "text": "16th century Portuguese missionary and explorer\nFrancisco \u00c1lvares (c.\u20091465 \u2013 1536\u20131541) was a Portuguese missionary and explorer. In 1515 he traveled to Ethiopia as part of the Portuguese embassy to emperor Lebna Dengel accompanied by returning Ethiopian ambassador Matheus. The embassy arrived only in 1520 to Ethiopia where he joined long sought Portuguese envoy P\u00earo da Covilh\u00e3. There he remained six years, returning to Lisbon in 1526-27 having written a report entitled \"Verdadeira Informa\u00e7\u00e3o das Terras do Preste Jo\u00e3o das \u00cdndias\" (\"A True Relation of the Lands of Prester John of the Indies\").\n1515 embassy to Ethiopia.\nFrancisco \u00c1lvares was a chaplain-priest and almoner to King Manuel I of Portugal. He was sent in 1515 as part of the Portuguese embassy to the n\u0259gus\u00e4 n\u00e4g\u00e4st (Emperor of Ethiopia), accompanied by the Ethiopian ambassador Matheus. Their first attempt to reach the port of Massawa failed due to the actions of Lopo Soares de Albergaria, governor of Portuguese India, which got no closer than the Dahlak Archipelago and was aborted with the death of the Portuguese ambassador, old Duarte Galv\u00e3o at Kamaran. \u00c1lvares and Mattheus were forced to wait until the arrival of Soares' replacement, Diogo Lopes de Sequeira, who successfully sent the embassy on, with Dom Rodrigo de Lima replacing Duarte Galv\u00e3o. The party at last reached Massawa on April 9, 1520, and reached the court of Lebna Dengel where he befriended several Europeans who had gained the favor of the Emperor, which included P\u00earo da Covilh\u00e3 and Nicolao Branceleon. Father \u00c1lvares remained six years in Ethiopia, returning to Lisbon in either 1526 or 1527.\nIn 1533 he was allowed to accompany Dom Martinho de Portugal to Rome on an embassy to Pope Clement VII, to whom Father \u00c1lvares delivered the letter Lebna Dengel had written to the Pope. The precise date of Francisco \u00c1lvares death, like that of his birth, is unknown, but according to the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition, it was later than 1540, in which year an account of his travels were published at Lisbon. In the introduction of their mid 20th century translation of \u00c1lvares' work, C.F. Beckingham and G.W.B. Huntingford furnish evidence that points to \u00c1lvares' death in Rome, and admit that he may have died before his work was published.\n\u00c1lvares' writings.\nIn 1540, Lu\u00eds Rodrigues published a version of \u00c1lvares account in a one volume folio, entitled \"Verdadeira Informa\u00e7\u00e3o das Terras do Preste Jo\u00e3o das Indias\" (\"A True Relation of the Lands of Prester John of the Indies\"). C.F. Beckingham and G.W.B. Huntingford cite evidence, based in part on the earlier work of Professor Roberto Almagia, showing that Rodrigues's publication is only a part of \u00c1lvares's entire account. Another version of what \u00c1lvares wrote was included in an anthology of travel narratives, \"Navigationi et Viaggi\" (1550) assembled and published by Giovanni Battista Ramusio. Almagia also identified three manuscripts in the Vatican Library which contain versions of excerpts from the original manuscript.\nFrancisco \u00c1lvares' work has been translated into English at least twice. The first time was the work of Henry Stanley, 3rd Baron Stanley of Alderley, for the Hakluyt Society in 1881. This translation was revised and augmented with notes by C. F. Beckingham and G. W. B. Huntingford, \"The Prester John of the Indies\" (Cambridge: Hakluyt Society, 1961).\nThe author of the 1911 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica article was critical of \u00c1lvares' information, believing it should \"be received with caution, as the author is prone to exaggerate, and does not confine himself to what came within his own observation.\" Beckingham and Huntingford, however, have a higher opinion of \u00c1lvares' testimony, stating that not only is it \"incomparably more detailed than any earlier account of Ethiopia that has survived; it is also a very important source for Ethiopian history, for it was written just before the country was devastated by the [...] invasions of the second quarter of the sixteenth century.\" He provides the first recorded and detailed descriptions of Axum and Lalibela. They continue:\n\"He is sometimes wrong, but very rarely silly or incredible. He made a few mistakes; he may well have made others that we cannot detect because he is our sole authority; when he tried to describe buildings his command of language was usually inadequate; he is often confused and obscure, though this may be as much his printer's fault as his own; his prose is frequently difficult to read and painful to translate; but he seems to us to be free from the dishonesty of the traveller who tries to exaggerate his own knowledge, importance, or courage\"."}
{"id": "11017", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11017", "title": "Francesco Andreini", "text": "Italian actor (c. 1548 \u2013 1624)\nFrancesco Andreini (c.\u20091548 \u2013 1624) was an Italian actor mainly of \"commedia dell'arte\" plays. He began his career playing the role of the unsophisticated love-stricken young man. Later, he played the role of Capitan Spavento (lit.\u2009'Captain Fright'), a Pickwickian character of excessive fatigue. He died on January 1, 1624, in Mantua, Italy at the age of 76.\nFrancesco Andreini was the leader of the Gelosi commedia dell'arte troupe, and had he not brought this type of theatre elsewhere, it would not have made it further to the mainstream media and developed into multilingualism and oral and textual transmissions. His role as Capitano made its way into modern media with adapted versions solely based on the original Capitano. Francesco had an impact on today's theatre and improvisation. \nLife.\nAndreini was a soldier under the banner of the Medici in the Ottoman\u2013Venetian War. He turned to theatre after 8 years in a Turkish jail.\nAndreini was born at Pistoia. He was a member of the company of I Gelosi which Henry IV of France summoned to Paris for his bride, the young queen Marie de' Medici, thus introducing the \"commedia dell'arte\" style to France.\nAndreini married sixteen-year-old Isabella Canali in 1578, when he was 30. She and their son, Giambattista Andreini, were also distinguished in the arts.\nAccomplishments.\nHe published his dialogue as Captain Spavento as \"La bravura del Capitano Spavento\". This dialogue takes place between the captain and his servant, Trappola. Francesco Andreini wrote four to five page boasts in his publication of his dialogue; although Andreini may have elaborated on these speeches in print, it is clear that he was trying to give the audience the intense verbosity within. Similarly, Andreini elaborates on the fact that the doctor was only talk, while the lovers could get carried away with themselves to any extent.\nAndreini spoke a handful of languages, including Italian, Turkish, English and French. He used a combination of these languages while performing. As Capitano, he often combined Italian and Turkish, claiming it was Arabic. He also used Grammelot in his works and was one of the original inventors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "11018", "revid": "1291695928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11018", "title": "Fifth Monarchists", "text": "English radical religious group, 1649\u20131660\nThe Fifth Monarchists, or Fifth Monarchy Men, were a Protestant sect with millennialist views active between 1649 and 1660 in the Commonwealth of England. The group took its name from a prophecy that claimed the four kingdoms of Daniel would precede the fifth, which would see the establishment of the kingship and kingdom of God on Earth. \nOne of a number of Nonconformist sects that emerged during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, its best-known adherent was Major-General Thomas Harrison, who was executed in October 1660 as a regicide. Oliver Cromwell was a sympathiser until 1653, when many Fifth Monarchists opposed his creation of The Protectorate. \nMembers believed the execution of Charles I in January 1649 marked the end of the Fourth Monarchy and viewed the Protectorate and 1660 Stuart Restoration as preventing the coming of the Fifth. Since some believed this justified military action, they were persecuted by both regimes and never became a mass movement. Many of their remaining leaders were executed after Thomas Venner's rising in January 1661, and the group dissolved.\nAlong with millenarianism and antinomianism, Fifth Monarchists shared many of their views with other Nonconformists. However, they were primarily united by shared political beliefs rather than being a religious group with a distinctive and coherent doctrine. The links this created between different factions gave them influence disproportionate to their numbers.\nBeliefs.\nThe Fifth Monarchists took their inspiration from the four kingdoms of Daniel. This prophesied that the Fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom of God, would be preceded by the Babylonian, Persian, Greek and Roman kingdoms. Followers believed the execution of Charles I in January 1649 marked the end of the Fourth or Roman Monarchy. Several became regicides in the belief his death would usher in the Kingdom of the Saints, or rule by those who were \"saved\", such as the Fifth Monarchists. The role of these so-called \"Saints\" was to prepare the masses for the Second Coming, although exactly when this would happen was debated. Based on the Book of Revelation, some believed Christ would return in 1666, which corresponded with the biblical number of the beast, while it was also common to refer to a \"Thousand Years\". \nMany supported \"Antinomianism\", a rejection of the legal system on the grounds that the \"Saved\" were not bound by the Ten Commandments, while they also believed it was their duty to resist any regime which hindered the coming of the Kingdom. Although the movement eventually split between those who opposed violence, the \"suffering Saints\", and the \"insurrectionist Saints\" like Thomas Venner who advocated taking up arms, these beliefs caused Oliver Cromwell and later contemporaries to see them as wild revolutionaries and enemies of the established order.\nOrigins and the Commonwealth.\nThe outbreak of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms in 1639 led to an exponential increase in the dissemination of radical political and religious views, including Millennialist ideas. Although Millenarianism was common among Puritans and even shared by some Royalist members of the Church of England, Fifth Monarchists were unique in that the concept was central to their theology. However, one recent historian argues it is more accurate to see them as a political group, rather than a religious sect with a distinctive and coherent doctrine. \nIn general, Fifth Monarchists also opposed Religious tolerance for non-Protestants, and unlike groups such as the Diggers had no desire to end the existing social order or extend political rights, since they argued only the \"Saved\" were worthy of power. Exceptions included the Levellers sympathiser Christopher Feake, and Mary Cary, who supported gender equality and measures to alleviate poverty; prior to her death in 1654, she wrote under the name \"MC\", and many assumed she was a man. \nThe Fifth Monarchists began life as a faction of the religious Independents who dominated the post-1648 Rump Parliament, with close links to Anabaptists. Their emergence as a separate sect is usually dated to December 1651, when a group of preachers including Feake, John Rogers, and John Simpson met in London. Disillusioned by the apparent failure of Parliament to further the \"Godly Revolution\", they agreed a programme of action to support their objectives, including active resistance to the Commonwealth government. \nPrimarily recruited from the London artisan class, the Fifth Monarchists attracted attention disproportionate to their actual numbers because these included senior officers of the New Model Army. Among them were Major Generals Thomas Harrison and Robert Overton, along with Colonels Nathaniel Rich, John Jones Maesygarnedd and William Goffe, as well as senior administrators such as John Carew. Many others were initially sympathetic to their views, including Cromwell and Sir Henry Vane, and the highpoint of their political influence came in April 1653 when Cromwell dismissed the Rump Parliament, an action which led the Fifth Monarchists to hail him as a new Moses. \nThey also supported his declaration of war on the Dutch Republic. Despite it being waged against fellow Protestants, the Monarchists argued that it was their duty to spread the Kingdom of the Saints to every country, whether Protestant or Catholic.. Cromwell replaced the Rump with a nominated body popularly known as \"Barebone's Parliament\"; out of 149 MPs, 15 can be identified as Fifth Monarchists, including Praise-God Barebone, Carew and Harrison. The inaugural session began in July 1653 but the different factions quickly became entangled in bitter disputes over tithes, which the Monarchists wanted to abolish rather than reduce, and reform of the legal system, which they argued should be based solely on laws contained in the Bible. On 8 December, the moderate majority passed a motion urging Cromwell to dissolve Parliament, leading to the establishment of the Protectorate on 16th. \nThe result was open conflict between the regime and the Fifth Monarchists; Harrison, Overton and Rich were dismissed from the army, while Rogers and Feake attacked Cromwell for his Apostasy and preached revolt to their followers. This caused a split with elements of the movement like John Carew who held Anabaptist views, notably their opposition to the use of violence. Rogers and Feake were arrested, while the government placed other members under surveillance and thereafter alternated persecution with tolerance in an attempt to split the movement. This policy had some success, with Rogers, Goffe, John Jones Maesygarnedd and the Welsh preacher Morgan Llwyd becoming reconciled with the regime, leaving a minority of insurrectionists like Venner who was imprisoned in 1657 for planning a rising. By the time he was released in 1659, the Monarchists had lost much of their influence and were no longer a significant force.\nRestoration and after.\nFollowing the Stuart Restoration in May 1660, Harrison was the first person to be found guilty of regicide and then hanged, drawn and quartered on 13 October. One reason was his justification of violent action against \"un-Godly rulers\", which meant he was viewed as an ongoing threat to the re-established order. This seemed confirmed on 6 January 1661, when Venner tried to incite a popular uprising to capture London in the name of \"King Jesus\", with fifty followers based in Norton Folgate.\nMost were killed or taken prisoner, with Venner and ten others executed for high treason on 19 and 21 January, while its failure led to the suppression of Non-conformist sects, culminating in the Act of Uniformity 1662. Although the Great Plague of London and the Great Fire of London briefly revived belief in the end of a world ruled by carnal human beings, Fifth Monarchy ceased to exist as a separate sect, although some doctrines were absorbed by Baptists and others who believed \"God's Kingdom\" could be achieved through spiritual means.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11020", "revid": "44719789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11020", "title": "February 15", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearFebruary 15 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11021", "revid": "4288359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11021", "title": "February 6", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearFebruary 6 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11022", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11022", "title": "Francis Hopkinson", "text": "American Founding Father and jurist (1737\u20131791)\nFrancis Hopkinson (October 2, 1737 \u2013 May 9, 1791) was an American Founding Father, lawyer, jurist, author, and composer. He designed Continental paper money and two early versions of flags, one for the United States and one for the United States Navy. He was a signer of the Declaration of Independence in July 1776 as a delegate from New Jersey.\nHopkinson served in various roles in the early United States government including as a member of the Second Continental Congress and as a member of the Navy Board. He became the first federal judge of the Eastern District Court of Pennsylvania on September 30, 1789.\nEducation and early career.\nBorn on October 2, 1737 (Gregorian), September 21, 1737 (Julian) in Philadelphia, Province of Pennsylvania. Hopkinson received an Artium Baccalaureus degree in 1757 from the College of Philadelphia (now the University of Pennsylvania) and an Artium Magister degree in 1760 from the same institution. He was the first American-born composer to write a surviving secular song. He was secretary of a commission of the Provincial Council of Pennsylvania which made a treaty between the province and certain Indian tribes in 1761. He entered private practice in Philadelphia from 1761 to 1766. He was collector of customs in Salem, Province of New Jersey, in 1763.\nHopkinson spent from May 1766 to August 1767 in England in hopes of becoming commissioner of customs for North America. Although unsuccessful, he spent time with the future Prime Minister Lord North, Hopkinson's cousin James Johnson, and the painter Benjamin West. Upon his return to Philadelphia in 1768, he sold varieties of fabric and port wine.\nIn 1768, Hopkinson was elected to the revived American Philosophical Society and served as its curator from 1776 to 1782. He was collector of customs for New Castle, Delaware Colony from 1772 to 1773. He resumed private practice in Bordentown, New Jersey from 1773 to 1774. He was a member of the New Jersey Provincial Council from 1774 to 1776. He was a member of the Executive Council of New Jersey in 1775. He was admitted to practice before the bar of the Supreme Court of New Jersey on May 8, 1775, and was elected an associate justice of that court in 1776 but declined the office.\nSecond Continental Congress and judicial service.\nIn 1776, Hopkinson served as a delegate to the Second Continental Congress (Continental Congress) from June 21 through November 18. He was a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence, representing New Jersey. He was the Chairman of the Navy Board in Philadelphia from November 18, 1776, to mid-August 1778. He was treasurer for the Continental Loan Office in Philadelphia from 1778 to 1781. He was judge of the Admiralty Court of Pennsylvania from 1779 to 1789.\nWhile sitting on the court, in December 1780 Hopkinson was impeached on allegations of accepting payment from litigants, accepting bribes in exchange for appointments, and trading in false certificates. After an impeachment trial, he was acquitted and remained in office. He was a member of the Pennsylvania Convention which ratified the United States Constitution.\nHopkinson was nominated by President George Washington on September 24, 1789, to the United States District Court for the District of Pennsylvania, to a new seat authorized by 1\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://. He was confirmed by the United States Senate on September 26, 1789, and received his commission the same day.\nCultural contributions.\nHopkinson wrote popular airs and political satires (\"jeux d'esprit\") in the form of poems and pamphlets. Some were widely circulated and powerfully assisted in arousing and fostering the spirit of political independence that issued in the American Revolution. His principal writings are \"A Pretty Story . . .\" (1774), a satire about King George; \"The Prophecy\" (1776); and \"The Political Catechism\" (1777). Other notable essays are \"Typographical Method of conducting a Quarrel\", \"Essay on White Washing\", and \"Modern Learning\".\nHopkinson began to play the harpsichord at age seventeen and, during the 1750s, hand-copied arias, songs, and instrumental pieces by many European composers. He is credited as being the first American-born composer to commit a composition to paper with his 1759 composition \"My Days Have Been So Wondrous Free\". By the 1760s, was playing with professional musicians in concerts.\nSome of his more notable songs include \"The Treaty\", \"The Battle of the Kegs\", and \"The New Roof, a song for Federal Mechanics\". He also played organ at Philadelphia's Christ Church and composed or edited a number of hymns and psalms including: \"A Collection of Psalm Tunes with a few Anthems and Hymns Some of them Entirely New, for the Use of the United Churches of Christ Church and St. Peter's Church in Philadelphia\" (1763), \"A psalm of thanksgiving, Adapted to the Solemnity of Easter: To be performed on Sunday, the 30th of March, 1766, at Christ Church, Philadelphia\" (1766), and \"The Psalms of David, with the Ten Commandments, Creed, Lord's Prayer, &amp;c. in Metre\" (1767). In the 1780s, Hopkinson modified a glass harmonica to be played with a keyboard and invented the Bellarmonic, an instrument that utilized the tones of metal balls.\nAt his alma mater, University of Pennsylvania, one of the buildings in the Fisher-Hassenfeld College House is named after him.\nGreat Seal of the United States.\nIn 1776, Hopkinson designed the Great Seal of New Jersey with assistance from Pierre Eugene du Simitiere in 1776. He was thus chosen as a consultant to design the Great Seal of the United States. Fourteen men worked on the Great Seal of the United States, including two other consultants \u2013 Simitiere (first Great Seal committee) and William Barton (third committee). The seal was finalized on June 20, 1782.\nIn the current rendition of the Great Seal of the United States, the 13 stars (constellation) representing the 13 original states have five points. They are arranged in the shape of a larger star with six points. The constellation comprising 13 smaller stars symbolizes the national motto, \"E pluribus unum.\" Originally, the design had individual stars with six points, but this was changed in 1841 when a new die was cast. This seal is now impressed upon the reverse of the United States one-dollar bill. The reverse of the seal, designed by Barton, contains an unfinished pyramid below a radiant eye. The unfinished pyramid was an image used by Hopkinson when he designed the Continental $50 currency bill.\nUnited States Flag.\nOn June 14, 1777, the Second Continental Congress adopted the Stars and Stripes as the first official national flag of the newly independent United States (later celebrated as Flag Day). The resolution creating the flag came from the Continental Marine Committee. Hopkinson became a member of the committee in 1776. At the time of the flag's adoption, he was the chairman of the Navy Board, which was under the Marine Committee. Today, that office has been transferred to the United States Secretary of the Navy.\nHopkinson is recognized as a designer of the Flag of the United States, and the journals of the Continental Congress support this. On May 25, 1780, Hopkinson wrote a letter to the Continental Board of Admiralty mentioning several patriotic designs he had completed during the previous three years. One was his Board of Admiralty seal, which contained a shield of seven red and six white stripes on a blue field. Others included the Treasury Board seal, \"7 devices for the Continental Currency,\" and \"the Flag of the United States of America.\" Hopkinson noted that he had not asked for any compensation for the designs but was seeking a reward: \"a Quarter Cask of the public Wine.\" The board sent that letter on to Congress.\nHopkinson submitted another bill on June 24 for his \"drawings and devices.\" In this second letter, Hopkinson did not mention designing the flag of the United States. Instead, the first item listed was \"the great Naval Flag of the United States\" along with the other contributions. This flag with its red outer stripes was designed to show up well on ships at sea. A parallel flag for the national flag was most likely intended by Hopkinson with white outer stripes as on the Great Seal of the United States and on the Bennington flag, which commemorated 50th anniversary of the founding of the United States in 1826. Ironically, the Navy flag was preferred as the national flag.\nFor the various designs, Hopkinson asked for cash in the amount of \u00a32,700. Auditor General James Milligan commissioned an evaluation of the request for payment. The report from the commissioner of the Chamber of Accounts said that the bill was reasonable and ought to be paid. Congress asked for an itemized bill for payment in cash. Hopkinson requested \u00a39 for the naval flag. A committee investigated Hopkinson's charges that his payment was being delayed for arbitrary reasons. The Treasury Board turned down the request in an October 27, 1780, report to Congress. The Board cited several reasons for its action, including the fact that Hopkinson \"was not the only person consulted on those exhibitions of Fancy [that were incidental to the Board (among them, the U.S. flag, the Navy flag, the Admiralty seal, and the Great Seal with a reverse)], and therefore cannot claim the sole merit of them and not entitled in this respect to the full sum charged.\" The reference to the work of others is most probably a reference to his work on the Great Seal. Therefore, he would not be eligible to be paid for the Great Seal. Furthermore, the Great Seal project was still a work in progress. No known committee of the Continental Congress was documented with the assignment to design the national flag or naval flag. Hence, there was no evidence of collaboration with others on Hopkinson's flag design.\nThere is no known sketch of a Hopkinson flag\u2014either U.S. or naval\u2014in existence today. However, he incorporated elements of the two flags he designed in his rough sketches of the Great Seal of the United States and his design for the Admiralty Board Seal. The rough sketch of his second Great Seal proposal has 7 white stripes and 6 red stripes. The impression of Hopkinson's Admiralty Board Seal has a chevron with 7 red stripes and 6 white stripes. The Great Seal reflects Hopkinson's design for a governmental flag, and the Admiralty Board Seal reflects Hopkinson's design for a naval flag. Both flags were intended to have 13 stripes. Because the original stars used in the Great Seal had six points, Hopkinson's U.S. flag might also have intended the use of 6-pointed stars. This is bolstered by his original sketch for the Great Seal that featured a U.S. flag with six-pointed asterisks for stars. The stripe arrangement would have been consistent with other flags of the period that had seven stripes below the canton, or blue area with stars. For example, two of the earliest known examples of Stars and Stripes flags were painted by a Dutch artist who witnessed the arrival of Navy Lieutenant John Paul Jones' squadron in Texel, The Netherlands, in 1779. The two flags have seven stripes below the canton.\nPersonal life.\nHopkinson was the son of Thomas Hopkinson and Mary Johnson Hopkinson. He married Ann Borden on September 1, 1768. They had five children. He was the father of Joseph Hopkinson, who was a member of the United States House of Representatives and also became a federal judge. Hopkinson's sister Mary (1742\u20131785) was married to Dr. John Morgan, second chief physician and director general of the Continental Army. According to Pennsylvania tax records and a Philadelphia census, Hopkinson owned at least two slaves.\nDeath.\nOn May 9, 1791, Hopkinson died in Philadelphia of a sudden apoplectic seizure. He was interred in Christ Church Burial Ground in Philadelphia.\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11023", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11023", "title": "Honorius", "text": "Western Roman emperor from 393 to 423\nHonorius (; 9 September 384 \u2013 15 August 423) was Roman emperor from 393 to 423. He was the younger son of emperor Theodosius I and his first wife Aelia Flaccilla. After the death of Theodosius in 395, Honorius, under the regency of Stilicho, ruled the western half of the empire while his brother Arcadius ruled the eastern half. His reign over the Western Roman Empire was notably precarious and chaotic. In 410, Rome was sacked for the first time since the Battle of the Allia almost 800 years prior.\nFamily.\nHonorius was born to Emperor Theodosius I and Empress Aelia Flaccilla on 9 September 384 in Constantinople. He was the brother of Arcadius and Pulcheria. In 386, his mother died, and in 387, Theodosius married Galla who had taken a temporary refuge in Thessaloniki with her family, including her brother Valentinian II and mother Justina, away from usurper Magnus Maximus. Theodosius and Galla had a daughter, Honorius's half-sister Galla Placidia. Honorius, Arcadius, and Galla Placidia were the only children of Theodosius to survive into adulthood.\nEmperor.\nEarly reign.\nAfter holding the consulate at the age of two in 386, Honorius was declared \"augustus\" by his father Theodosius I, and thus co-ruler, on 23 January 393, after the death of Valentinian II and the usurpation of Eugenius. When Theodosius died in January 395, Honorius and Arcadius divided the Empire. Honorius became Western Roman emperor at the age of ten.\nDuring the early part of his reign, Honorius depended on the military leadership of the general Stilicho, who had been appointed by Theodosius and was of mixed Vandal and Roman ancestry. To strengthen his bonds with the young emperor and to make his grandchild an imperial heir, Stilicho married his daughter Maria to Honorius. The epithalamion written for the occasion by Stilicho's court poet Claudian survives. Honorius was also influenced by the Popes of Rome. So it was that Pope Innocent I and Western bishops may have been successful in persuading Honorius to write to his brother, arguing for convening a synod in Thessalonica.\nAt first Honorius based his capital in Milan, but when the Visigoths under King Alaric I entered Italy in 401 he moved his capital to the coastal city of Ravenna, which was protected by a ring of marshes and strong fortifications. While the new capital was easier to defend, it was poorly situated to allow Roman forces to protect Central Italy from the increasingly regular threat of barbarian incursions. It is significant that the Emperor's residence remained in Ravenna until the overthrow of Romulus Augustulus in 476. The greater ease with which Ravenna could be defended was probably the reason why Ravenna was chosen not only as the capital of the Ostrogothic Kingdom in Italy, but also for the seat of the Byzantine exarchs as well.\nStilicho and the defense of Italy.\nHonorius's reign experienced continued barbarian incursions into Gaul, Italy and Hispania. At the same time, a host of usurpers rose up. \nFirst Gildo, the \"comes of Africa\" and \"magister utriusque militiae per Africam\" in Northern Africa, led a revolt which lasted for two years (397\u2013398). Stilicho eventually subdued it through the local command of Mascezel, Gildo's brother.\nThe next crisis was the Visigothic invasion of Italy in 402 under the command of their king, Alaric I. Stilicho was absent in Raetia in the latter months of 401, when Alaric, who was also the Eastern Empire's magister militum in Illyricum, suddenly marched with a large army through the Julian Alps and entered Italy.\nStilicho hurried back to protect Honorius and the legions of Gaul and Britain were summoned to defend Italy. Honorius, at Milan, was besieged by Alaric, who marched into Liguria. Stilicho narrowly defeated Alaric at Pollentia, on the river Tanarus on Easter Day (6 April 402). Alaric retreated to Verona, where Stilicho attacked him again yet the battle was not entirely conclusive. The Visigoths were allowed to retreat back to Illyricum. In 405 Stilicho met an invasion of Italy led across the Danube by Radagaisus. They brought devastation to the heart of the Empire, until Stilicho defeated them in 406 and recruited most of them into his forces. Then, in 405 or 406, a number of tribes, according to some sources allegedly including Vandals, Alans, and Suebi, crossed the Rhine and invaded Gaul.\nThe situation in Britain was even more difficult. The British provinces were isolated, lacking support from the Empire, and the soldiers supported the revolts of Marcus (406\u2013407), Gratian (407), and Constantine III. Constantine invaded Gaul in 407, occupying Arles, and while Constantine was in Gaul, his son Constans ruled over Britain. By 410, Britain may have been told to look after its own affairs and expect no aid from Rome, although it has been argued that the order was sent to the people of Bruttium in Italy, not Britain.\nThe western empire was effectively overstretched due to the massive invasion of Alans, Suebi and Vandals who, although they had been repulsed from Italy in 406, moved into Gaul on 31 December 406, and arrived in Hispania in 409. In early 408, Stilicho attempted to strengthen his position at court by marrying his second daughter, Thermantia, to Honorius after the death of the Empress Maria in 407. Another invasion by Alaric was prevented in 408 by Stilicho when he forced the Roman Senate to pay 4,000 pounds of gold to persuade the Goths to leave Italy.\nHonorius, in the meantime, was at Bononia, on his way from Ravenna to Ticinum, when the news reached him of his brother's death in May 408. He at first was planning to go to Constantinople to help set up the court during the transition from Arcadius to Theodosius II. Summoned from Ravenna for advice, Stilicho advised Honorius not to go, and proceeded to go himself. In Stilicho's absence, a minister named Olympius gained the confidence of Honorius. He convinced the emperor that his father-in-law was conspiring with the barbarians to overthrow him.\nOn his return to Ravenna, Honorius ordered the arrest and execution of Stilicho. With Stilicho's fall, Honorius moved against all of his former father-in-law's allies, killing and torturing key individuals and ordering the confiscation of the property of anyone who had borne any office while Stilicho was in command. Honorius's wife Thermantia was taken from the imperial throne and given over to her mother; Eucherius, the son of Stilicho, was put to death. The purge also massacred the families of Stilicho's foederati troops, and they defected en masse to Alaric.\nIn October 408, Alaric returned to Italy to claim more gold and land to settle in, as feudatory vassals of the Empire, which Stilicho had promised him. The city bought him off with 5,000 lbs of gold and 30,000 lbs of silver after a short siege with Rome on the verge of famine.\nA palace revolution in Honorius's court led meanwhile to a change of ministers, and those hostile to the Goths were replaced by officers favorable to Alaric, who began peace negotiations. While the embassy was absent, a new change occurred at Ravenna, and Honorius disclaimed the peace which was on the verge of being concluded. The enraged Alaric returned to Rome in late 409 and forced the Senate to elect Priscus Attalus as emperor, who ratified Alaric's former treaty with Stilicho.\nSack of Rome.\nRome had been under Visigothic siege since shortly after Stilicho's deposition and execution in the summer of 408. In 410, the Eastern Roman Empire sent six legions (6,000 men; due to changes in tactics, legions of this period were about 1,000 soldiers, down from the 6,000-soldier legions of the Republic era and Empire period up to late 4th century) from Ravenna to aid Honorius, but Alaric ambushed the legions on the way, and only a handful of them reached Rome. Lacking a strong general to control the by-now mostly Germanic Roman army, Honorius could do little to attack Alaric's forces directly, and apparently adopted the only strategy he could in the situation: wait passively for the Visigoths to grow weary and spend the time marshalling what forces he could.\nTo counter Attalus, Honorius tried to negotiate with Alaric in addition to restricting grain shipments to Rome from North Africa. Attalus dispatched an army to conquer Africa and restore the grain supply to Rome, but the governor, Heraclian, who was loyal to Honorius, wiped out this force as soon as it landed on the coast. As Rome was dependent on North African grain for sustenance, the populace was faced with the prospect of famine, and they blamed Attalus for the impending calamity. Growing desperate, Attalus searched for means of pacifying the people, but found himself, in consequence of conciliatory expenditures, incapable of satisfying his debt to Alaric, and thus alienated both Romans and Goths. In turn he came out to be exploited in political terms. Confronted with the increasing unpopularity and truculence of Attalus, Alaric dethroned him in 410 and proposed to renew negotiations with Honorius. Honorius, overconfident at Attalus's fall and the victory of his general Heraclian over Attalus's African expeditionary force, refused negotiation, and declared Alaric the eternal enemy of the Republic.\nStricken by starvation, somebody opened Rome's defenses to Alaric and the Visigoths poured in. The city had not been under the control of a foreign force since an invasion of Gauls some eight centuries before. The sack itself was notably mild as sacks go. For example, churches and religious statuary went unharmed. The psychological blow to the contemporary Roman world was considerably more painful. The shock of this event reverberated from Britain to Jerusalem, and inspired Augustine to write his magnum opus, \"The City of God\".\nConstantius and the beginning of erosion of the Western Empire.\nThe revolt of Constantine III in the west continued through this period. In 409, Gerontius, Constantine III's general in Hispania, rebelled against him, proclaimed Maximus Emperor, and besieged Constantine at Arles. Honorius now found himself an able commander, Constantius, who defeated Maximus and Gerontius, and then Constantine, in 411.\nGaul was again a source of troubles for Honorius: just after Constantius's troops had returned to Italy, Jovinus revolted in northern Gaul, with the support of Alans, Burgundians, and the nobility of Gallic descent. Jovinus tried to negotiate with the invading Goths of Ataulf (412), but his proclamation of his brother Sebastianus as Augustus made Ataulf seek alliance with Honorius. Honorius had Ataulf defeat and execute Jovinus in 413. At the same time, Heraclianus raised the standard of revolt in North Africa, but failed during an invasion of Italy. Defeated, he fled back to Carthage and was killed.\nIn 414, Constantius attacked Ataulf, who proclaimed Priscus Attalus emperor again. Constantius drove Ataulf into Hispania, and Attalus, having again lost Visigoth support, was captured and deposed once again. In the eleventh consulship of Honorius and the second of Constantius, the Emperor entered Rome in triumph, with Attalus at the wheels of his chariot. Honorius punished Attalus by cutting off his right finger and thumb, inflicting the same fate with which Attalus had threatened Honorius. Remembering how Attalus had suggested that Honorius should retire to some small island, he returned the favor by banishing Attalus to the island of Lipara.\nNortheastern Gaul became subject to even greater Frankish influence, while a treaty signed in 418 granted to the Visigoths southwestern Gaul, the former Gallia Aquitania. Under the influence of Constantius, Honorius issued the Edict of 418, which was designed to enable the Empire to retain a hold on the lands which were to be surrendered to the Goths. This edict relaxed the administrative bonds that connected all the Seven Provinces (The Maritime Alps, Narbonensis Prima, Narbonensis Secunda, Novempopulania, Aquitania Prima, Aquitania Secunda and Viennensis) with the central government. It removed the imperial governors and allowed the inhabitants, as a dependent federation, to conduct their own affairs, for which purpose representatives of all the towns were to meet every year in Arles.\nIn 417, Constantius married Honorius's sister, Galla Placidia, much against her will. In 421, Honorius recognized him as co-emperor Constantius III; however, when the announcement of his elevation was sent to Constantinople, Theodosius refused to recognise him. Constantius, enraged, began preparations for a military conflict with the eastern empire but before he could commence it, he died in September 421.\nIn 420\u2013422, another Maximus (or perhaps the same) gained and lost power in Hispania. By the time of Honorius's death in 423, Britain, Spain and Gaul had been ravaged by barbarians. In his final years, Honorius fell out with his sister after his soldiers clashed with hers. Galla Placidia and her children, the future emperor Valentinian III and his sister, Honoria, were forced to flee to Constantinople.\nDeath.\nHonorius died of edema on 15 August 423, leaving no heir. In the subsequent interregnum Joannes was nominated Emperor. The following year, however, the Eastern Emperor Theodosius II installed his cousin Valentinian III, son of Galla Placidia and Constantius III, as Emperor.\nThe Mausoleum of Honorius was located on the Vatican Hill, accessed from the transept of the Old Saint Peter's Basilica. It was first used for Maria. Probably Thermantia and Honorius's sister Galla Placidia, and perhaps other imperial family members, were later buried there. In the 8th century it was transformed into a church, the Chapel of St Petronilla, which held the relics of the saint and was demolished when the New St Peter's was erected.\nThe year 410 also saw Honorius reply to a British plea for assistance against local barbarian incursions, called the \"Rescript of Honorius\". Preoccupied with the Visigoths, Honorius lacked any military capability to assist the distant province. According to the sixth century Byzantine scholar Zosimus, \"Honorius wrote letters to the cities in Britain, bidding them to guard themselves.\" This sentence is located randomly in the middle of a discussion of southern Italy; no further mention of Britain is made, which has led some modern academics to suggest that the rescript does not apply to Britain, but to Bruttium in Italy.\nAssessments.\nIn his \"History of the Wars\", Procopius mentions a likely apocryphal story where, on hearing the news that Rome had \"perished\", Honorius was initially shocked, thinking the news was in reference to a favourite chicken he had named \"Roma\".\nAt that time they say that the Emperor Honorius in Ravenna received the message from one of the eunuchs, evidently a keeper of the poultry, that Rome had perished. And he cried out and said, 'And yet it has just eaten from my hands!' For he had a very large cock, Rome by name; and the eunuch comprehending his words said that it was the city of Rome which had perished at the hands of Alaric, and the emperor with a sigh of relief answered quickly: 'But I thought that my fowl Rome had perished.' So great, they say, was the folly with which this emperor was possessed.\n\u2014Procopius, \"The Vandalic War\" (https://)While the tale is discounted as a rumour by more recent historians like Edward Gibbon, it is useful in understanding Roman public opinion towards Honorius.\nHonorius was negatively assessed by some 19th and 20th century historians, including J.B. Bury.\nHonorius issued a decree during his reign, prohibiting men from wearing trousers in Rome. The last known gladiatorial games took place during the reign of Honorius, who banned the practice in 399 and again in 404, reportedly due to the martyrdom of a Christian monk named Telemachus while he was protesting a gladiator fight.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11024", "revid": "1318956343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11024", "title": "Formant", "text": "Spectrum of phonetic resonance in speech production\nIn speech science and phonetics, a formant is the broad spectral maximum that results from an acoustic resonance of the human vocal tract. In acoustics, a formant is usually defined as a broad peak, or local maximum, in the spectrum. For harmonic sounds, with this definition, the formant frequency is sometimes taken as that of the harmonic that is most augmented by a resonance. The difference between these two definitions resides in whether \"formants\" characterise the production mechanisms of a sound or the produced sound itself. In practice, the frequency of a spectral peak differs slightly from the associated resonance frequency, except when, by luck, harmonics are aligned with the resonance frequency, or when the sound source is mostly non-harmonic, as in whispering and vocal fry.\nA room can be said to have formants characteristic of that particular room, due to its resonances, i.e., to the way sound reflects from its walls and objects. Room formants of this nature reinforce themselves by emphasizing specific frequencies and absorbing others, as exploited, for example, by Alvin Lucier in his piece \"I Am Sitting in a Room\". In acoustic digital signal processing, the way a collection of formants (such as a room) affects a signal can be represented by an impulse response.\nIn both speech and rooms, formants are characteristic features of the resonances of the space. They are said to be \"excited\" by acoustic sources such as the voice, and they shape (filter) the sources' sounds, but they are not sources themselves.\nHistory.\nFrom an acoustic point of view, phonetics had a serious problem with the idea that the effective length of vocal tract changed vowels. Indeed, when the length of the vocal tract changes, all the acoustic resonators formed by mouth cavities are scaled, and so are their resonance frequencies. Therefore, it was unclear how vowels could depend on frequencies when talkers with different vocal tract lengths, for instance bass and soprano singers, can produce sounds that are perceived as belonging to the same phonetic category. There had to be some way to normalize the spectral information underpinning the vowel identity. Hermann suggested a solution to this problem in 1894, coining the term \u201cformant\u201d. A vowel, according to him, is a special acoustic phenomenon, depending on the intermittent production of a special partial, or \u201cformant\u201d, or \u201ccharacteristique\u201d feature. The frequency of the \u201cformant\u201d may vary a little without altering the character of the vowel. For \u201clong e\u201d (\"ee\" or \"iy\") for example, the lowest-frequency \u201cformant\u201d may vary from 350 to 440\u00a0Hz even in the same person.\nPhonetics.\nFormants are distinctive frequency components of the acoustic signal produced by speech, musical instruments or singing. The information that humans require to distinguish between speech sounds can be represented purely quantitatively by specifying peaks in the frequency spectrum.\nMost of these formants are produced by tube and chamber resonance, but a few whistle tones derive from periodic collapse of Venturi effect low-pressure zones.\nThe formant with the lowest frequency is called \"F\"1, the second \"F\"2, the third \"F\"3, and so forth. The fundamental frequency or pitch of the voice is sometimes referred to as \"F\"0, but it is not a formant. Most often the two first formants, \"F\"1 and \"F\"2, are sufficient to identify the vowel. The relationship between the perceived vowel quality and the first two formant frequencies can be appreciated by listening to \"artificial vowels\" that are generated by passing a click train (to simulate the glottal pulse train) through a pair of bandpass filters (to simulate vocal tract resonances). Front vowels have higher \"F\"2, while low vowels have higher \"F\"1. Lip rounding tends to lower \"F\"1 and \"F\"2 in back vowels and \"F\"2 and \"F\"3 in front vowels.\nNasal consonants usually have an additional formant around 2500\u00a0Hz. The liquid usually has an extra formant at 1500\u00a0Hz, whereas the English \"r\" sound () is distinguished by a very low third formant (well below 2000\u00a0Hz).\nPlosives (and, to some degree, fricatives) modify the placement of formants in the surrounding vowels. Bilabial sounds (such as and in \"ball\" or \"sap\") cause a lowering of the formants; on spectrograms, velar sounds ( and in English) almost always show \"F\"2 and \"F\"3 coming together in a 'velar pinch' before the velar and separating from the same 'pinch' as the velar is released; alveolar sounds (English and ) cause fewer systematic changes in neighbouring vowel formants, depending partially on exactly which vowel is present. The time course of these changes in vowel formant frequencies are referred to as 'formant transitions'.\nIn normal voiced speech, the underlying vibration produced by the vocal folds resembles a sawtooth wave, rich in\nharmonic overtones. If the fundamental frequency or (more often) one of the overtones is higher than a resonance frequency of the system, then the resonance will be only weakly excited and the formant usually imparted by that resonance will be mostly lost. This is most apparent in the case of soprano opera singers, who sing at pitches high enough that their vowels become very hard to distinguish.\nControl of resonances is an essential component of the vocal technique known as overtone singing, in which the performer sings a low fundamental tone, and creates sharp resonances to select upper harmonics, giving the impression of several tones being sung at once.\nSpectrograms may be used to visualise formants. In spectrograms, it can be hard to distinguish formants from naturally occurring harmonics when one sings. However, one can hear the natural formants in a vowel shape through atonal techniques such as vocal fry.\nFormant estimation.\nFormants, whether they are seen as acoustic resonances of the vocal tract, or as local maxima in the speech spectrum, like band-pass filters, are defined by their frequency and by their spectral width (bandwidth).\nDifferent methods exist to obtain this information. Formant frequencies, in their acoustic definition, can be estimated from the frequency spectrum of the sound, using a spectrogram (in the figure) or a spectrum analyzer. However, to estimate the acoustic resonances of the vocal tract (i.e. the speech definition of formants) from a speech recording, one can use \"linear predictive coding\". An intermediate approach consists in extracting the spectral envelope by neutralizing the fundamental frequency, and only then looking for local maxima in the spectral envelope.\nFormant plots.\nThe first two formants are important in determining the quality of vowels, and are frequently said to correspond to the open/close (or low/high) and front/back dimensions (which have traditionally been associated with the shape and position of the tongue). Thus the first formant \"F\"1 has a higher frequency for an open or low vowel such as and a lower frequency for a closed or high vowel such as or ; and the second formant \"F\"2 has a higher frequency for a front vowel such as and a lower frequency for a back vowel such as .\nVowels will almost always have four or more distinguishable formants, and sometimes more than six. However, the first two formants are the most important in determining vowel quality and are often plotted against each other in vowel diagrams, though this simplification fails to capture some aspects of vowel quality such as rounding.\nMany writers have addressed the problem of finding an optimal alignment of the positions of vowels on formant plots with those on the conventional vowel quadrilateral. The pioneering work of Ladefoged used the Mel scale because this scale was claimed to correspond more closely to the auditory scale of pitch than to the acoustic measure of fundamental frequency expressed in Hertz. Two alternatives to the Mel scale are the Bark scale and the ERB-rate scale. Another widely adopted strategy is plotting the difference between \"F\"1 and \"F\"2 rather than \"F\"2 on the horizontal axis.\nSinger's formant.\nStudies of the frequency spectrum of trained speakers and classical singers, especially male singers, indicate a clear formant around 3000\u00a0Hz (between 2800 and 3400\u00a0Hz) that is absent in speech or in the spectra of untrained speakers or singers. It is thought to be associated with one or more of the higher resonances of the vocal tract. It is this increase in energy at 3000\u00a0Hz which allows singers to be heard and understood over an orchestra. This formant is actively developed through vocal training, for instance through so-called \"voce di strega\" or \"witch's voice\" exercises and is caused by a part of the vocal tract acting as a resonator. In classical music and vocal pedagogy, this phenomenon is also known as \"squillo\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11025", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11025", "title": "February 20", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearFebruary 20 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11026", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11026", "title": "List of programmers", "text": "This is a list of programmers notable for their contributions to software, either as original author or architect, or for later additions. All entries must already have associated articles.\nSome persons notable as computer scientists are included here because they work in program as well as research.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n * See also* External links"}
{"id": "11028", "revid": "5795946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11028", "title": "Film stock", "text": "Medium used for recording motion pictures\nFilm stock is a type of photographic film that is used for recording motion pictures or animation. It is recorded on by a movie camera, developed, edited, and projected onto a screen using a movie projector. \nPhotographic film consists of a long strip of transparent plastic film base, coated on one side with a photographic emulsion: a mixture of gelatin and microscopic light-sensitive silver halide crystals. A very short exposure is made, producing an invisible latent image in the emulsion, which can be chemically developed into a visible photograph. \nMost movie film records a negative image and a reversed print onto another reel of film is needed to project from. Many commercially recorded films use a digital intermediate step, in which film is scanned digitally for editing, and either printed from the digital file onto a positive reel with a film recorder, or projected digitally. Alternatively, \"reversal film\" can be used, which records a positive image. \nIn black and white photographic film there is usually one layer of silver salts. When the exposed grains are developed, the silver salts are converted to metallic silver, which blocks light and appears as the black part of the film negative. Color film has at least three sensitive layers. Dyes, which adsorb to the surface of the silver salts, make the crystals sensitive to different colors. Typically the blue-sensitive layer is on top, followed by the green and red layers. During development, the exposed silver salts are converted to metallic silver, just as with black-and-white film. But in a color film, the by-products of the development reaction simultaneously combine with chemicals known as color couplers that are included either in the film itself or in the developer solution to form colored dyes. Because the by-products are created in direct proportion to the amount of exposure and development, the dye clouds formed are also in proportion to the exposure and development. Following development, the silver is converted back to silver salts in the \"bleach step\". It is removed from the film in the \"fix step\" and is sometimes recovered for subsequent use or sale. Fixing leaves behind only the formed color dyes, which combine to make up the colored visible image. Later color films, like Kodacolor II, have as many as 12 emulsion layers, with upwards of 20 different chemicals in each layer. Photographic film and film stock tend to be similar in composition and speed, but often not in other parameters such as frame size and length.\nHistory.\n1888\u20131899: Before standardization.\nEarly motion picture experiments in the 1880s were performed using a fragile paper roll film, with which it was difficult to view a single, continuously moving image without a complex apparatus. The first transparent and flexible film base material was celluloid, which was discovered and refined for photographic use by John Carbutt, Hannibal Goodwin, and George Eastman. Eastman Kodak made celluloid film commercially available in 1889; Thomas Henry Blair, in 1891, was his first competitor. The stock had a frosted base to facilitate easier viewing by transmitted light. Emulsions were orthochromatic. By November 1891 William Dickson, at Edison's laboratory, was using Blair's stock for Kinetoscope experiments. Blair's company supplied film to Edison for five years. Between 1892 and 1893, Eastman experienced problems with production. Because of patent lawsuits in 1893, Blair left his American company and established another in Britain. Eastman became Edison's supplier of film.\nBlair's new company supplied European filmmaking pioneers, including Birt Acres, Robert Paul, George Albert Smith, Charles Urban, and the Lumi\u00e8re Brothers. By 1896, the new movie projector required a fully transparent film base that Blair's American operation could not supply. Eastman shortly thereafter bought the company out and became the leading supplier of film stock. Louis Lumi\u00e8re worked with Victor Planchon to adapt the Lumi\u00e8re \"Blue Label\" (Etiquette Bleue) photographic plate emulsion for use on celluloid roll film, which began in early 1896.\nEastman's first motion picture film stock was offered in 1889. At first the film was the same as photographic film. By 1916, separate \"Cine Type\" films were offered. From 1895, Eastman supplied their motion picture roll film in rolls of 65 feet, while Blair's rolls were 75 feet. If longer lengths were needed, the unexposed negative rolls could be cemented in a darkroom, but this was largely undesirable by most narrative filmmakers. The makers of Actuality films were much more eager to undertake this method, however, in order to depict longer actions. They created cemented rolls as long as 1,000 feet. American Mutoscope and Biograph was the first known company to use such film for the Jeffries-Sharkey fight on 3 November 1899.\n1900\u20131919: Toward the standard picture film.\nAs the quantity of film and filmmakers grew, the demand for standardization increased. Between 1900 and 1910, film formats gradually became standardized and film stocks improved. A number of film gauges were made. Eastman increased the length of rolls to 200 feet without major adjustments to the emulsion, retaining a large market share. Lumi\u00e8re reformulated its stock to match the speed of Eastman film, naming it 'Etiquette Violette' (Violet Label). Blair sold his English company to Path\u00e9 in 1907 and retired to the US. Path\u00e9 began to supplement its operation in 1910 by purchasing film prints, stripping the emulsion from the film base and re-coating it. 35mm film began to become the dominant gauge because of the commonality of Edison's and Lumi\u00e8re's cameras. Consumers usually purchased unperforated film and had to punch it by perforators that were often imprecise, causing difficulty in making prints for the opposite perforation format. In 1908, the perforators began to be made by Bell and Howell. Eastman Kodak used the Bell and Howell machine to perforate its films. In 1909, Edison's organization of the Motion Picture Patents Trust agreed to what would become the standard: 35\u00a0mm gauge, with Edison perforations and a 1.33 aspect ratio.\nAgfa began to produce motion picture film in 1913, but remained a largely local supplier until World War I boycotts of popular French, American and Italian film stocks allowed the UFA film studio to flourish, boosting Agfa's orders. All film stocks were manufactured on a nitrate film base, which is highly flammable. Nitrate film fires were virtually impossible to extinguish. A significant number of fatal accidents occurred in theatrical projection booths, where the heat of the projector lamp made ignition a possibility. Amateur filmmaking (home movies) slowly developed during this period. Kodak developed a heat-resistant 'safety base' for home projection.\nIn 1909, tests showed cellulose diacetate to be a viable replacement base, and Kodak began selling acetate-base films the following year in 22\u00a0mm widths for Edison's work on the Home Kinetoscope, which was commercially released in 1912. Eastman Kodak introduced a non-flammable 35\u00a0mm film stock in 1909. The plasticizers used to make the film flexible evaporated quickly, making the film dry and brittle, causing splices to part and perforations to tear. In 1911 the major American film studios returned to using nitrate stock. More amateur formats began to use acetate-based film, and several, including Kodak's own 16 mm format, were designed specifically to be manufactured with safety base. Kodak released Cine Negative Film Type E in 1916 and Type F (later known as Negative Film Par Speed Type 1201) in 1917. As both of these orthochromatic films were no faster than previous offerings, the improvements were in granularity and sharpness.\n1920s: Diversification of film sensitivity.\nFilm stock manufacturers began to diversify their products. Each manufacturer had previously offered one negative stock (usually orthochromatic) and one print stock. In 1920, a variant of Type F film known as X-back was introduced to counteract the effects of static electricity on the film, which can cause sparking and create odd exposure patterns on the film. A resin backing was used on the film, which rendered the film too opaque to allow focusing through the back of the film, a common technique for many cameras of that era. The X-back stock was popular on the east coast of the US. Other manufacturers were established in the 1920s, including American E.I. Dupont de Nemours in 1926 and Belgian Gevaert in 1925. Panchromatic film stock became more common. Created in 1913 for use in early color film processes such as Kinemacolor, panchromatic was first used in a black-and-white film for exterior sequences in \"Queen of the Sea\" (1918) and originally available as a special order product. The stock's increased sensitivity to red light made it an attractive option for day for night shooting. Kodak financed a feature in 1922, shot entirely with panchromatic stock, \"The Headless Horseman\", to promote the film when Kodak introduced it as a standard option. Panchromatic film stock increased costs and no motion pictures were produced on it in their entirety for several years. The cross-cutting between panchromatic and orthochromatic stocks caused continuity problems with costume tones and panchromatic film was often avoided.\nOrthochromatic film remained dominant until the mid-1920s due to Kodak's lack of competition in the panchromatic market. In 1925, Gevaert introduced an orthochromatic stock with limited color sensitivity and a fully panchromatic stock, Pan-23. In 1926, Kodak lowered the price of panchromatic stock to parity with its orthochromatic offering and the panchromatic stock began to overtake the orthochromatic stock's market share within a few years. As similar panchromatic film stocks were also manufactured by Agfa and Path\u00e9, making the shift to panchromatic stocks largely complete by 1928, Kodak discontinued orthochromatic stock in 1930.\nColor films.\nExperiments with color films were made as early as the late 19th century, but practical color film was not commercially viable until 1908, and for amateur use when Kodak introduced Kodachrome for 16\u00a0mm in 1935 and 8\u00a0mm in 1936. Commercially successful color processes used special cameras loaded with black-and-white separation stocks rather than color negative. Kinemacolor (1908\u20131914), Technicolor processes 1 through 4 (1917\u20131954), and Cinecolor used one, two or three strips of monochrome film stock sensitized to certain primary colors or exposed behind color filters in special cameras. Technicolor introduced a color reversal stock, called Monopack, for location shooting in 1941; it was ultimately a 35\u00a0mm version of Kodachrome that could be used in standard motion picture cameras.\nEastman Kodak introduced their first 35mm color negative stock, Eastman Color Negative film 5247, in 1950. A higher quality version in 1952, Eastman Color Negative film 5248, was quickly adopted by Hollywood for color motion picture production, replacing both the expensive three-strip Technicolor process and Monopack.\nClassification and properties.\nThere are several variables in classifying stocks; in practice, one orders raw stock by a code number, based on desired sensitivity to light.\nBase.\nA piece of film consists of a light-sensitive emulsion applied to a tough, transparent base, sometimes attached to anti-halation backing or \"rem-jet\" layer (now only on camera films). Originally the highly flammable cellulose nitrate was used. In the 1930s, film manufacturers introduced \"safety film\" with a cellulose triacetate plastic base. All amateur film stocks were safety film, but the use of nitrate persisted for professional releases. Kodak discontinued the manufacture of nitrate base in 1951, and the industry transitioned entirely to safety film in 1951 in the United States and by 1955 internationally. Since the late 1990s, almost all release prints have used polyester film stock.\nEmulsion.\nThe emulsion consists of silver halide grains suspended in a gelatin colloid; in the case of color film, there are three layers of silver halide, which are mixed with color couplers and interlayers that filter specific light spectra. These end up creating yellow, cyan, and magenta layers in the negative after development.\nChemistry.\nDevelopment chemicals applied to an appropriate film can produce either a positive (showing the same densities and colors as the subject) or negative image (with dark highlights, light shadows, and, in principle, complementary colors). The first films were darkened by light: negative films. Later films that produce a positive image became known as reversal films; processed transparent film of this type can be projected onto a screen. Negative images need to be transferred onto photographic paper or other substrate which reverses the image again, producing a final positive image. Creating a positive image from a negative film can also be done by scanning the negative to create a computer file which can then be reversed by software.\nImage record.\nDifferent emulsions and development processes exist for a variety of image recording possibilities: the two most common of which are black and white, and color. However, there are also variant types, such as infrared film (in black and white or false color); specialist technical films, such as those used for X-rays; and obsolete processes, such as orthochromatic film. Generally, however, the vast majority of stock used today is \"normal\" (visible spectrum) color, although \"normal\" black and white also commands a significant minority percentage.\nPhysical characteristics.\nFilm is also classified according to its gauge and the arrangement of its perforations\u2014 gauges range from 8 mm to 70 mm or more, while perforations may vary in shape, pitch, and positioning. The film is also distinguished by how it is wound with regard to perforations and base or emulsion side, as well as whether it is packaged around a core, a daylight spool, or within a cartridge. Depending on the manufacturing processes and camera equipment, lengths can vary anywhere from 25 to 2000 feet. Common lengths include 25 feet for 8\u00a0mm, 50 feet for Super 8, 100 and 400 feet for 16\u00a0mm, 400 and 1000 feet for 35\u00a0mm, and 1000 for 65/70\u00a0mm.\nResponsivity.\nA critical property of a stock is its film speed, determined by ASA or its sensitivity to light listed by a measurement on the raw stock which must be chosen with care. Speed determines the range of lighting conditions under which the film can be shot, and is related to granularity and contrast, which influence the look of the image. The stock manufacturer will usually give an exposure index (EI) number equal to the ASA which they recommend exposing for. However, factors such as forced or non-standard development (such as bleach bypass or cross processing), compensation for filters or shutter angle, as well as intended under- and over-exposure may cause the cinematographer to actually \"rate\" the stock differently from the EI. This new rating is not a change to the stock itself\u00a0\u2014 it is merely a way of calculating exposure without figuring out the compensation after each light reading.\nColor temperature.\nAnother important quality of color film stock in particular is its color balance, which is defined by the color temperature at which it accurately records white. Tungsten lighting is defined at 3200 K, which is considered \"warmer\" in tone and shifted towards orange; daylight is defined at 5600 K, which is considered \"colder\" and shifted towards blue. This means that unfiltered tungsten stock will look normal shot under tungsten lights, but blue if shot during daylight. Conversely, daylight stock shot in daylight will look normal, but orange if shot under tungsten lights. Color temperature issues such as these can be compensated for by other factors such as lens filters and color gels placed in front of the lights. The color temperature of a film stock is generally indicated next to the film speed number\u00a0\u2014 e.g. 500T stock is color film stock with an ASA of 500 and balanced for tungsten light; 250D would have an ASA of 250 and be balanced for daylight. While black-and-white film has no color temperature itself, the silver halide grains themselves tend to be slightly more responsive to blue light, and therefore will have daylight and tungsten speeds\u00a0\u2014 e.g. Kodak's Double-X stock is rated 250D/200T, since the tungsten light will give slightly less exposure than an equivalent amount of daylight.\nSound.\nA fundamental limitation of film stock as a recording medium is that it reacts to light, but not sound. This is why the first films were literally silent (and exhibitors often provided live musical accompaniment to compensate). Sound films later became possible after engineers developed techniques like sound-on-disc to synchronize playback of a separate soundtrack and then sound-on-film to print the soundtrack on the film itself.\nDeterioration.\nAll plastic is subject to deterioration through physical or chemical means, and thus, motion picture film is at risk for the same reason. Films deteriorate over time, which can damage individual frames or even lead to the entire film being destroyed. Cellulose nitrate, cellulose diacetate and triacetate are known to be unstable media: improperly preserved film can deteriorate in a period of time much faster than many photographs or other visual presentations. Cellulose nitrate, because of its unstable chemistry, eventually breaks down, releasing nitric acid, further catalyzing the decomposition. In the final stage of celluloid decomposition, the film has turned into a rust-like powder. Likewise, tri-acetate stock is also vulnerable to deterioration. Because of the small gauge of the film, owners of home-made films often find that their film can become shrunken and brittle to the point where the film is unwatchable in the space of a few years. In general, decaying acetate film breaks down into acetic acid, and similar to celluloid decomposition, leads to an auto-catylictic breakdown of the base that cannot be reversed. The result of the acetic acid released is a strong odor of vinegar, which is why the decay process in the archival community is known as \"vinegar syndrome\". Modern polyester-based stocks are far more stable by comparison and are rated to last hundreds of years if stored properly.\nIntermediate and print stocks.\nThe distinction between camera stocks and print stocks involves a difference in the recording process. When the work print or edit master has been approved, the Original Camera Negative (OCN) is assembled by a negative cutter using the edited work print or EDL (edit decision list) as a guide. A series of Answer Prints are then made from the OCN. During the Answer Print stage, corrections in the film's density and color are corrected (timed) to the filmmakers' tastes. Interpositive (IP) prints are struck from the OCN, checked to make sure they look the same as the custom timed Answer Print, and then each IP is used to make one or more Dupe Negative (DN) copies. The release prints are then generated from the DN(s). Recently, with the development of digital intermediate (DI), it has become possible to completely edit, composite visual effects, and color grade the image digitally at full resolution and bit-depth. In this workflow, the answer print is generated digitally and then written out to the IP stage using a laser film printer known as a film recorder.\nDue to the specialized nature of the exposure and the higher degree of control afforded by the film lab equipment, these intermediate and release stocks are specially designed solely for these applications and are generally not feasible for camera shooting. Because intermediates only function to maintain the image information accurately across duplication, each manufacturer tends to only produce one or two different intermediate stocks. Similarly, release print stocks usually are available only in two varieties: a \"normal\" print or a deluxe print (on more-costly print film like Kodak Vision Premiere) with slightly greater saturation and contrast.\nDecline and current status.\nUse of film remained the dominant form of cinematography until the early 21st century when digital formats supplanted the use of film in many applications. This has also led to the replacement of film projectors with digital projection.\nDespite this, some filmmakers continue to opt for film stock as a medium of choice for aesthetic reasons. Movies produced entirely on photochemical film or with a combination of analog and digital methods are a minority, but maintain a stable presence among both arthouse and mainstream film releases. \nHowever, digital formats are sometimes deliberately altered to achieve a film look, such as adding film grain or other noise for artistic effect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11029", "revid": "764407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11029", "title": "Form 1040", "text": "IRS tax form\nForm 1040, officially titled the U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, is an IRS tax form used by United States residents to file personal federal income tax returns. The form is used to calculate a taxpayer's total taxable income and to determine the amount of tax owed to or refundable from the federal government.\nFor individual taxpayers who follow the calendar year, income tax returns are generally due by Tax Day, which typically falls on April 15 of the following year. If April 15 falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is extended to the next business day. Taxpayers may obtain an automatic extension to file Form 1040 until October 15 by submitting Form 4868. However, this extension applies only to the filing deadline; any taxes owed must still be paid by the original due date to avoid penalties and interest.\nForm 1040 consists of two pages (23 lines in total), not counting attachments. The first page collects information about the taxpayer(s) and dependents. In particular, the taxpayer's filing status is reported on this page. The second page reports income, calculates the allowable deductions and credits, figures the tax due given adjusted income, and applies funds already withheld from wages or estimated payments made towards tax liability. On the right side of the first page is the presidential election campaign fund checkoff, which allows individuals to designate that the federal government give $3 of the tax it receives to the presidential election campaign fund. Altogether, 142 million individual income tax returns were filed for the tax year 2018 (filing season 2019), 92% of which were filed electronically.\nFiling requirements.\nWho must file?\nForm 1040 (or a variant thereof) is the main tax form filed by individuals who are deemed residents of the United States for tax purposes. The corresponding main form filed by businesses is Form 1120, also called the U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return.\nAn individual is considered a resident of the United States for tax purposes if he or she is a citizen of the United States or a resident alien of the United States for tax purposes. An individual is a resident alien of the United States if he or she passes either the Substantial Presence Test or the Green Card Test, although there are also some other cases; individuals who have taxable income in the United States but fail the criteria for being resident aliens must file as nonresident aliens for tax purposes. While residents of the United States for tax purposes file Form 1040, nonresident aliens must file Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ. There is also a \"dual status alien\" for aliens whose status changed during the year.\nResident aliens of the United States for tax purposes must generally file if their income crosses a threshold where their taxable income is likely to be positive, but there are many other cases where it may be legally desirable to file. For instance, even if not required, individuals can file a return in order to receive a refund on withheld income or to receive certain credits (e.g. earned income tax credit).\nFiling modalities.\nThe form may be filed either by paper or online.\nPaper filing.\nPaper filing is the universally accepted filing method. Form 1040, along with its variants, schedules, and instructions, can be downloaded as PDFs from the Internal Revenue Service website. Finalized versions of the forms for the tax year (which in the US is the same as the calendar year) are released near the end of January of the following year.\nPaper forms can be filled and saved electronically using a compatible PDF reader, and then printed. This way, it is easy to keep electronic copies of one's filled forms despite filing by paper. Alternatively, they can be printed out and filled by hand. A combination of the approaches may also be used, with some content filled in electronically and additional content written in by hand. As a general rule, where possible, it makes sense to fill electronically, but in some cases filling by hand may be necessary (for instance, if additional notes of explanation need to be added, or the font used for electronic filling is too large to fit the information in the space provided).\nThe only parts of the form that cannot be filled electronically are the signature lines.\nThe paper Form 1040, along with all relevant schedules and additional forms, must be sent in a single packet by mail or courier to an IRS address determined by the US state the taxpayer is filing from and whether or not a payment is enclosed.\nThe IRS accepts returns that are stapled or paperclipped together. However, any check or payment voucher, as well as accompanying Form 1040-V, must \"not\" be stapled or paperclipped with the rest of the return, since payments are processed separately.\nElectronic filing.\nThe IRS allows US residents for tax purposes to file electronically in three ways:\nMany paid tax preparers are required to file individual tax returns electronically, and most tax compliance software file electronically on the taxpayer's behalf. Even the tax preparers who are not so required, must file Form 8948 if they choose paper filing, providing an explanation for why they are not filing electronically.\nComparison.\nIf one is not eligible for IRS Free File, depending on the company used it might cost hundreds of dollars to file electronically, whereas paper filing has no costs beyond those of printing and mailing. Furthermore, the available existing electronic filing options may not offer sufficient flexibility with respect to arranging one's tax return, adding attachments, or putting written notes of explanation that can help preempt IRS questions. In the past, filing electronically may have exposed the taxpayer's data to the risk of accidental loss or identity theft, but now e-filing with reputable companies is considered more secure than paper filing.\nSignature requirement.\nForm 1040 must be signed and dated in order to be considered valid. If filing jointly with a spouse, both must sign and date. If a return is submitted electronically, individuals must use either a Self-Select PIN or Practitioner PIN.\nSubstitute return.\nIf an individual decides not to file a return, the IRS may (after it has sent several reminders) file a substitute return.\nVariants.\nFor filing the regular tax return, in addition to the standard Form 1040, there are currently three variants: the 1040-NR 1040-SR, and 1040-X.\nForm 1040-NR is used by taxpayers who are considered \"non-resident aliens\" for tax purposes.\nForm 1040-SR may be used by taxpayers who are 65 or older. The 1040-SR form is functionally the same as 1040, but 1040-SR is easier to fill-out by hand, because the text is larger and the checkboxes are larger. Seniors may continue to use the standard 1040 for tax filing if they prefer. Its creation was mandated by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, and it was first used for filing taxes for the 2019 tax year. \nForm 1040-X (officially, the \"Amended U.S. Individual Tax Return\") is used to make corrections on Form 1040, Form 1040A, and Form 1040EZ tax returns that have been previously filed (note: forms 1040-A and 1040-EZ were discontinued starting with tax year 2018, but a 1040X may still be filed amending one of these tax forms filed for previous years).\nAccompanying payments.\nForm 1040-V.\nThe 1040-V (officially, the \"Payment Voucher for Form 1040\") is used as an optional payment voucher to be sent in along with a payment for any balance due on the \"Amount you owe\" line of the 1040.\nThe form is entirely optional. The IRS will accept payment without the 1040V form. However including the 1040-V allows the IRS to process payments more efficiently.\nForm 1040-V and any accompanying payment should be included in the same packet as the tax return, but should \"not\" be stapled or paper-clipped along with the tax return, since it is processed separately.\nSchedules and extra forms.\nSince 1961 Form 1040 has had various separate attachments to the form. These attachments are usually called \"schedules\" because prior to the 1961, the related sections were schedules on the main form identified by letter. Form 1040 currently has 20 attachments, which may need to be filed depending on the taxpayer. For 2009 and 2010 there was an additional form, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Schedule M, due to the \"Making Work Pay\" provision of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (\"the stimulus\").\nStarting in 2018, 1040 was \"simplified\" by separating out 6 new schedules numbers Schedule 1 through Schedule 6 to make parts of the main form optional. The new schedules had the prior old 1040 line numbers to make transition easier.\nIn addition to the listed schedules, there are dozens of other forms that may be required when filing a personal income tax return. Typically these will provide additional details for deductions taken or income earned that are listed either on form 1040 or its subsequent schedules.\nIn 2014 there were two additions to Form 1040 due to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act\u2014the premium tax credit and the individual mandate.\nIn most situations, other Internal Revenue Service or Social Security Administration forms such as Form W-2 must be attached to the Form 1040, in addition to the Form 1040 schedules. There are over 100 other specialized forms that may need to be completed along with Schedules and the Form 1040. However, Form 1099 need not be attached if no tax was withheld. In general, employer-sent forms are used to substantiate claims of withholding, so only forms that involve withholding need to be attached.\nEstimated payments and withholding.\nFor most individuals, withholding is the main way through which taxes are paid. However, income that is not subject to withholding must be estimated using Form 1040-ES. (It may be possible to avoid filing Form 1040-ES by increasing one's withholding and instead filing a Form W-4.)\nEstimated payments can be made using the Electronic Federal Tax Payment System.\nPayments, refunds, and penalties.\nThere is a three-year limit to when individuals can claim a tax refund. However, payments that are due must be paid immediately.\nIn addition it is possible to apply one's refunds to next year's taxes and also to change one's mind later.\nAn automatic extension until October 15 to file Form 1040 can be obtained by filing Form 4868. There is a penalty for not filing a tax return by April 15 that depends on whether the individual got a filing extension and the amount of unpaid taxes. However, since the maximum penalty is 25% of unpaid taxes, if an individual has paid all their taxes, there is no penalty for not filing.\nIn addition to making sure that one pays one's taxes for the year by Tax Day, it is also important to make sure that one has paid partial taxes throughout the tax year in the form of estimated tax payments or employer tax withholding. If one has not done so, then a tax penalty may be assessed. The minimum amount of estimated taxes that need to be paid to avoid penalties depends on a variety of factors, including one's income in the tax year in question as well as one's income in the previous year (in general, if one pays 90% of the current year's tax liability or 100% of the previous year's tax liability during the tax year, one is not subject to estimated tax penalty even if this year's taxes are higher, but there are some caveats to that rule). Employer withholding is also treated differently from estimated tax payment, in that for the latter, the time of the year when the payment was made matters, whereas for the former, all that matters is how much has been withheld as of the end of the year (though there are other restrictions on how one can adjust one's withholding pattern that need to be enforced by the employer).\nWhen filing Form 1040, the penalty for failing to pay estimated taxes must be included on the form (on line 79) and included in the total on line 78 (if a net payment is due). The taxpayer is not required to compute other interest and penalties (such as penalty for late filing or late payment of taxes). If the taxpayer does choose to compute these, the computed penalty can be listed on the bottom margin of page 2 of the form, but should not be included on the amount due line (line 78).\nRelationship with state tax returns.\nEach state has separate tax codes in addition to federal taxes. Form 1040 is only used for federal taxes, and state taxes should be filed separately based on the individual state's form. Some states do not have any income tax. Although state taxes are filed separately, many state tax returns will reference items from Form 1040. For example, California's 540 Resident Income Tax form makes a reference to Form 1040's line 37 in line 13.\nCertain tax filing software, such as TurboTax, will simultaneously file state tax returns using information filled in on the 1040 form.\nThe federal government allows individuals to deduct their state income tax or their state sales tax from their federal tax through Schedule A of Form 1040, but not both. In addition to deducting either income tax or sales tax, an individual can further deduct any state real estate taxes or private property taxes.\nOMB control number controversy.\nOne argument used by tax protesters against the legitimacy of the 1040 Form is the OMB Control Number of the Paperwork Reduction Act argument. Tax protesters contend that Form 1040 does not contain an \"OMB Control Number\" which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget under the Paperwork Reduction Act.\nThe relevant clauses of the Paperwork Reduction Act state that:\n\u00a7 1320.6 Public protection.\n(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information that is subject to the requirements of this part if:\n(1) The collection of information does not display, in accordance with \u00a71320.3(f) and \u00a71320.5(b)(1), a currently valid OMB control number assigned by the Director in accordance with the Act...\n(e) The protection provided by paragraph (a) of this section does not preclude the imposition of a penalty on a person for failing to comply with a collection of information that is imposed on the person by statute\u2014e.g., 26 U.S.C. \u00a76011(a) (statutory requirement for person to file a tax return)...\nThe Courts have responded to the OMB Control Number arguments with the following arguments. 1) Form 1040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return has contained the OMB Control number since 1981. 2) As ruled in a number of cases, the absence of an OMB Control number does not eliminate the legal obligation to file or pay taxes.\nCases involving the OMB Control Number Argument include:\nThe United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit argues that the provisions on the Paperwork Reduction Act are not relevant as the act applies only to information requests made after December 31, 1981, and tax returns starting from 1981 contained an OMB Control Number.\nThe United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit rejected the convicted taxpayer's OMB control number argument by stating \"Finally, we have no doubt that the IRS has complied with the Paperwork Reduction Act. Form 1040 bears a control number from OMB, as do the other forms the IRS commonly distributes to taxpayers. That this number has been constant since 1981 does not imply that OMB has shirked its duty.\"\nIn this Case, IRS agents who had calculated Lawrence's tax liability had made an error and it was discovered that Lawrence owed less taxes than originally determined. Lawrence asked the trial court to order the government to reimburse him for his legal fees, to which the trial court ruled against him. He appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, contending that the government's conduct against him had been \"vexatious, frivolous, or in bad faith.\" and also raising the OMB Control Number Argument.\nThe United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit rejected the OMB argument stating that\nAccording to Lawrence, the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA) required the Internal Revenue Service to display valid Office of Management and Budget (OMB) numbers on its Form 1040... Lawrence argues that the PRA by its terms prohibits the government from imposing a criminal penalty upon a citizen for the failure to complete a form where the information request at issue does not comply with the PRA... Yet Lawrence conceded at oral argument that no case from this circuit establishes such a proposition, and in fact Lawrence cites no caselaw from any jurisdiction that so holds. In contrast, the government referenced numerous cases supporting its position that the PRA does not present a defense to a criminal action for failure to file income taxes.\"\nHistory.\nOriginal form structure and tax rates.\nThe first Form 1040 was published for use for the tax years 1913, 1914, and 1915;\nthe number 1040 was simply the next number in the sequential numbering of forms. For 1913, taxes applied only from March 1 to December 31. The original Form 1040, available on the IRS website as well as elsewhere, is three pages and 31 lines long, with the first page focused on computing one's income tax, the second page focused on more detailed documentation of one's income and the third page describing deductions and including a signature area. There is an additional page of instructions. The main rules were:\nJust over 350,000 forms were filed in 1914 and all were audited.\nSubsequent changes.\nFor 1916, Form 1040 was converted to an annual form (i.e., updated each year with the new tax year printed on the form). Initially, the IRS mailed tax booklets (Form 1040, instructions, and most common attachments) to all households. As alternative delivery methods (CPA/Attorneys, Internet forms) increased in popularity, the IRS sent fewer packets via mail. In 2009 this practice was discontinued.\nWith the Current Tax Payment Act of 1943, income tax withholding was introduced. The Individual Income Tax Act of 1944 created standard deductions on the 1040.\nThe tax return deadline was original set at March 1. This was changed to March 15 in the Revenue Act of 1918, and in the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the tax return deadline was changed to April 15 from March 15, as part of a large-scale overhaul of the tax code. The reason for March 1 was not explained in the law, but was presumably to give time after the end of the tax (and calendar) year to prepare tax returns. The two-week extension from March 1 to March 15 occurred after the Revenue Act of 1918 was passed in February 1919, given only a few weeks to complete returns under the new law. The month extension from March 15 to April 15 was to give additional time for taxpayers and accountants to prepare taxes, owing to the more complex tax code, and also helped spread work by the IRS over a longer time, as it would receive returns over a longer time.\nThe 1040A was introduced by the 1930s to simplify the filing process and discontinued after tax year 2017. It was limited to taxpayers with taxable income below $100,000 who take the standard deduction instead of itemizing deductions.\nThe 1040EZ was used for tax years 1982\u20132017. Its use was limited to taxpayers with no dependents to claim, with taxable income below $100,000 who take the standard deduction instead of itemizing deductions.\nElectronic filing was introduced in a limited form in 1986, with the passage of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, and starting 1992, taxpayers who owed money were allowed to file electronically. The Electronic Federal Tax Payment System, jointly managed by the IRS and Financial Management Service, started in 1996 and allowed people to make estimated payments.\nWith the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, a new, redesigned Form 1040 was released for tax year 2018. It reduced the number of lines from 79 to 23, removed two of the variants (1040A and 1040EZ) in favor of the redesigned Form 1040, and redesigned the supplemental schedules.\nChanges to complexity and tax rates.\nThe complexity and compliance burden of the form and its associated instructions have increased considerably since 1913. The National Taxpayers Union has documented the steady increase in complexity from a 34-line form in 1935 to a 79-line form in 2014, decreasing to 23 lines in 2018. \"Quartz\" created an animated GIF showing the gradual changes to the structure and complexity of the form. The NTU table is below with data through 2014:\nThe number of pages in the federal tax law grew from 400 in 1913 to over 72,000 in 2011. The increase in complexity can be attributed to an increase in the number and range of activities being taxed, an increase in the number of exemptions, credits, and deductions available, an increase in the subtlety of the rules governing taxation and the edge cases explicitly spelled out based on historical experience, and an increase in the base of taxpayers making it necessary to offer longer, more explicit instructions for less sophisticated taxpayers. As an example, whereas the initial versions of Form 1040 came only with a rate schedule included in the tax form itself, the IRS now publishes a complete tax table for taxable income up to $100,000 so that people can directly look up their tax liability from their taxable income without having to do complicated arithmetic calculations based on the rate schedule. The IRS still publishes its rate schedule so that people can quickly compute their approximate tax liability, and lets people with incomes of over $100,000 compute their taxes directly using the Tax Computation Worksheet.\nIn addition to an increase in the complexity of the form, the tax rates have also increased, though the increase in tax rates has not been steady (with huge upswings and downswings) in contrast with the steady increase in tax complexity.\nCost of filing.\nFor tax return preparation, Americans spent roughly 20 percent of the amount collected in taxes (estimating the compliance costs and efficiency costs is difficult because neither the government nor taxpayers maintain regular accounts of these costs). As of 2013, there were more tax preparers in the US (1.2 million) than there were law enforcement officers (765 thousand) and firefighters (310,400) combined. The National Taxpayers Union estimated the 2018 compliance cost at 11 hours per form 1040 vs. 12 hours in 2017, with a total of $92.5 billion spent in individual income tax compliance vs. $94.27 billion in 2017.\nIn 2008, 57.8 percent of tax returns were filed with assistance from paid tax preparers, compared to about 20 percent of taxpayers employing a paid preparer in the 1950s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11033", "revid": "4677237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11033", "title": "Frederick Douglass", "text": "American abolitionist (1818\u20131895)\nFrederick Douglass (born Frederick Augustus Washington Bailey, c. February 14, 1818\u00a0\u2013 February 20, 1895) was an American social reformer, abolitionist, orator, writer, and statesman. He was the most important leader of the movement for African-American civil rights in the 19th century.\nAfter escaping from slavery in Maryland in 1838, Douglass became a national leader of the abolitionist movement in Massachusetts and New York and gained fame for his oratory and incisive antislavery writings. Accordingly, he was described by abolitionists in his time as a living counterexample to claims by supporters of slavery that enslaved people lacked the intellectual capacity to function as independent American citizens. Northerners at the time found it hard to believe that such a great orator had once been enslaved. It was in response to this disbelief that Douglass wrote his first autobiography.\nDouglass wrote three autobiographies, describing his experiences as an enslaved person in his \"Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave\" (1845), which became a bestseller and was influential in promoting the cause of abolition, as was his second book, \"My Bondage and My Freedom\" (1855). Following the Civil War, Douglass was an active campaigner for the rights of freed slaves and wrote his last autobiography, \"Life and Times of Frederick Douglass\". First published in 1881 and revised in 1892, three years before his death, the book covers his life up to those dates. Douglass also actively supported women's suffrage, and he held several public offices. Without his knowledge or consent, Douglass became the first African American nominated for vice president of the United States, as the running mate of Victoria Woodhull on the Equal Rights Party ticket.\nDouglass believed in dialogue and in making alliances across racial and ideological divides, as well as, after breaking with William Lloyd Garrison, in the of the U.S. Constitution. When radical abolitionists, under the motto \"No Union with Slaveholders\", criticized Douglass's willingness to engage in dialogue with slave owners, he replied: \"I would unite with anybody to do right and with nobody to do wrong.\"\nEarly life and slavery.\nFrederick Augustus Washington Bailey was born into slavery on the Eastern Shore of the Chesapeake Bay in Talbot County, Maryland. The plantation was between Hillsboro and Cordova; his birthplace was likely his grandmother's cabin east of Tappers Corner and west of Tuckahoe Creek. In his first autobiography, Douglass stated: \"I have no accurate knowledge of my age, never having seen any authentic record containing it.\" In successive autobiographies, he gave more precise estimates of when he was born, his final estimate being 1817. However, based on the extant records of Douglass's former owner, Aaron Anthony, historian Dickson J. Preston determined that Douglass was born in February 1818. Though the exact date of his birth is unknown, he chose to celebrate February 14 as his birthday, remembering that his mother called him her \"Little Valentine\".\nBirth family.\nDouglass's enslaved mother was of African descent and his father, who may have been her master, was apparently of European descent; in his \"Narrative\" (1845), Douglass wrote: \"My father was a white man.\" According to David W. Blight's 2018 biography of Douglass, \"For the rest of his life he searched in vain for the name of his true father.\" Douglass's genetic heritage likely also included Native American. Douglass said his mother Harriet Bailey gave him his name Frederick Augustus Washington Bailey and, after he escaped to the North in September 1838, he took the surname Douglass, having already dropped his two middle names.\nHe later wrote of his earliest times with his mother:\nThe opinion was also whispered that my master was my father; but of the correctness of this opinion, I know nothing. ... My mother and I were separated when I was but an infant. ... It is a common custom, in the part of Maryland from which I ran away, to part children from their mothers at a very early age. ... I do not recollect of ever seeing my mother by the light of day. She was with me in the night. She would lie down with me, and get me to sleep, but long before I waked she was gone.\nAfter separation from his mother during infancy, young Frederick lived with his maternal grandmother Betsy Bailey, who was also enslaved, and his maternal grandfather Isaac, who was free. Betsy would live until 1849. Frederick's mother remained on the plantation about away, visiting Frederick only a few times before her death when he was 7 years old.\nReturning much later, about 1883, to purchase land in Talbot County that was meaningful to him, he was invited to address \"a colored school\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly learning and experience.\nThe Auld family.\nAt the age of 6, Douglass was separated from his grandparents and moved to the Wye House plantation, where Aaron Anthony worked as overseer and Edward Lloyd was his unofficial master. After Anthony died in 1826, Douglass was given to Lucretia Auld, wife of Thomas Auld, who sent him to serve Thomas's brother Hugh Auld and his wife Sophia Auld in Baltimore. From the day he arrived, Sophia saw to it that Douglass was properly fed and clothed, and that he slept in a bed with sheets and a blanket. Douglass described her as a kind and tender-hearted woman, who treated him \"as she supposed one human being ought to treat another.\" Douglass felt that he was lucky to be in the city, where he said enslaved people were almost freemen, compared to those on plantations.\nWhen Douglass was about 12, Sophia Auld began teaching him the alphabet. Hugh Auld disapproved of the tutoring, feeling that literacy would encourage enslaved people to desire freedom. Douglass later referred to this as the \"first decidedly antislavery lecture\" he had ever heard. \"'Very well, thought I,'\" wrote Douglass. \"'Knowledge unfits a child to be a slave.' I instinctively assented to the proposition, and from that moment I understood the direct pathway from slavery to freedom.\"\nUnder her husband's influence, Sophia came to believe that education and slavery were incompatible and one day snatched a newspaper away from Douglass. She stopped teaching him altogether and hid all potential reading materials, including her Bible, from him. In his autobiography, Douglass related how he learned to read from white children in the neighborhood and by observing the writings of the men with whom he worked.\nDouglass continued, secretly, to teach himself to read and write. He later often said, \"knowledge is the pathway from slavery to freedom.\" As Douglass began to read newspapers, pamphlets, political materials, and books of every description, this new realm of thought led him to question and condemn the institution of slavery. In later years, Douglass credited \"The Columbian Orator\", an anthology that he discovered at about age 12, with clarifying and defining his views on freedom and human rights. First published in 1797, the book is a classroom reader, containing essays, speeches, and dialogues, to assist students in learning reading and grammar. He later learned that his mother had also been literate, about which he would later declare:\nI am quite willing, and even happy, to attribute any love of letters I possess, and for which I have got\u2014despite of prejudices\u2014only too much credit, \"not\" to my admitted Anglo-Saxon paternity, but to the native genius of my sable, unprotected, and uncultivated \"mother\"\u2014a woman, who belonged to a race whose mental endowments it is, at present, fashionable to hold in disparagement and contempt.\nWilliam Freeland.\nWhen Douglass was hired out to William Freeland, he \"gathered eventually more than thirty male slaves on Sundays, and sometimes even on weeknights, in a Sabbath literacy school.\"\nEdward Covey.\nIn 1833, Thomas Auld took Douglass back from Hugh (\"[a]s a means of punishing Hugh,\" Douglass later wrote). Thomas sent Douglass to work for Edward Covey, a poor farmer who had a reputation as a \"slave-breaker\". He whipped Douglass so frequently that his wounds had little time to heal. Douglass later said the frequent whippings broke his body, soul, and spirit. The 16-year-old Douglass finally rebelled against the beatings, however, and fought back. After Douglass won a physical confrontation, Covey never tried to beat him again.\nRecounting his beatings at Covey's farm in \"Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave\", Douglass described himself as \"a man transformed into a brute!\" Still, Douglass came to see his physical fight with Covey as life-transforming, and he introduced the story in his autobiography as such: \"You have seen how a man was made a slave; you shall see how a slave was made a man.\"\nEscape from slavery.\nDouglass first tried to escape from Freeland, who had hired him from his owner, but was unsuccessful. In 1837, Douglass met and fell in love with Anna Murray, a free black woman in Baltimore about five years his senior. Her free status strengthened his belief in the possibility of gaining his own freedom. Murray encouraged him and supported his efforts by aid and money.\nOn September 3, 1838, Douglass successfully escaped by boarding a northbound train of the Philadelphia, Wilmington and Baltimore Railroad in Baltimore. The area where he boarded was formerly thought to be a short distance east of the train depot, in a recently developed neighborhood between the modern neighborhoods of Harbor East and Little Italy. This depot was at President and Fleet Streets, east of \"The Basin\" of the Baltimore harbor, on the northwest branch of the Patapsco River. Research cited in 2021, however, suggests that Douglass in fact boarded the train at the Canton Depot of the Philadelphia, Wilmington, and Baltimore Railroad on Boston Street, in the Canton neighborhood of Baltimore, further east.\nDouglass reached Havre de Grace, Maryland, in Harford County, in the northeast corner of the state, along the southwest shore of the Susquehanna River, which flowed into the Chesapeake Bay. Although this placed him only some from the Maryland\u2013Pennsylvania state line, it was easier to continue by rail through Delaware, another slave state. Dressed in a sailor's uniform provided to him by Murray, who also gave him part of her savings to cover his travel costs, he carried identification papers and protection papers that he had obtained from a free black seaman.\nDouglass crossed the wide Susquehanna River by the railroad's steam-ferry at Havre de Grace to Perryville on the opposite shore, in Cecil County, then continued by train across the state line to Wilmington, Delaware, a large port at the head of the Delaware Bay. From there, because the rail line was not yet completed, he went by steamboat along the Delaware River farther northeast to the \"Quaker City\" of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, an anti-slavery stronghold. He continued to the safe house of abolitionist David Ruggles in New York City. His entire journey to freedom took less than 24 hours. Douglass later wrote of his arrival in New York City:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have often been asked, how I felt when first I found myself on free soil. And my readers may share the same curiosity. There is scarcely anything in my experience about which I could not give a more satisfactory answer. A new world had opened upon me. If life is more than breath, and the 'quick round of blood,' I lived more in one day than in a year of my slave life. It was a time of joyous excitement which words can but tamely describe. In a letter written to a friend soon after reaching New York, I said: 'I felt as one might feel upon escape from a den of hungry lions.' Anguish and grief, like darkness and rain, may be depicted; but gladness and joy, like the rainbow, defy the skill of pen or pencil.\nOnce Douglass had arrived, he sent for Murray to follow him north to New York. She brought the basic supplies for them to set up a home. They were married on September 15, 1838, by a black Presbyterian minister, just eleven days after Douglass had reached New York. At first they adopted Johnson as their married name, to divert attention.\nReligious views.\nAs a child, Douglass was exposed to a number of religious sermons, and in his youth, he sometimes heard Sophia Auld reading the Bible. In time, he wanted to learn to read; he began copying bible verses, and he eventually converted to Christianity. He described this approach in his last biography, \"Life and Times of Frederick Douglass\":\nI was not more than thirteen years old when, in my loneliness and destitution, I longed for some one to whom I could go, as to a father and protector. The preaching of a white Methodist minister, named Hanson, was the means of causing me to feel that in God I had such a friend. He thought that all men, great and small, bond and free, were sinners in the sight of God: that they were but natural rebels against his government; and that they must repent of their sins, and be reconciled to God through Christ. I cannot say that I had a very distinct notion of what was required of me, but one thing I did know well: I was wretched and had no means of making myself otherwise. I consulted a good coloured man named Charles Lawson, and in tones of holy affection he told me to pray, and to \"cast all my care upon God.\" This I sought to do; and though for weeks I was a poor, broken-hearted mourner, traveling through doubts and fears, I finally found my burden lightened, and my heart relieved. I loved all mankind, slaveholders not excepted, though I abhorred slavery more than ever. I saw the world in a new light, and my great concern was to have everybody converted. My desire to learn increased, and especially did I want a thorough acquaintance with the contents of the Bible.\nDouglass was mentored by Rev. Charles Lawson, and, early in his activism, he often included biblical allusions and religious metaphors in his speeches. Although a believer, he strongly criticized religious hypocrisy and accused slaveholders of \"wickedness\", lack of morality, and failure to follow the Golden Rule. In this sense, Douglass distinguished between the \"Christianity of Christ\" and the \"Christianity of America\" and considered religious slaveholders and clergymen who defended slavery as the most brutal, sinful, and cynical of all who represented \"wolves in sheep's clothing\".\nIn \"What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?\", an oration Douglass gave in 1852 at the Corinthian Hall of Rochester, he sharply criticized the attitude of religious people who kept silent about slavery, and he charged that ministers committed a \"blasphemy\" when they taught it as sanctioned by religion. He considered that a law passed to support slavery was \"one of the grossest infringements of Christian Liberty\" and said that pro-slavery clergymen within the American Church \"stripped the love of God of its beauty, and leave the throne of religion a huge, horrible, repulsive form\", and \"an abomination in the sight of God\".\nOf ministers like John Chase Lord, Leonard Elijah Lathrop, Ichabod Spencer, and Orville Dewey, he said that they taught, against the Scriptures, that \"we ought to obey man's law before the law of God\". He further asserted, \"in speaking of the American church, however, let it be distinctly understood that I mean the great mass of the religious organizations of our land. There are exceptions, and I thank God that there are. Noble men may be found, scattered all over these Northern States ... Henry Ward Beecher of Brooklyn, Samuel J. May of Syracuse, and my esteemed friend [Rev. R. R. Raymond]\".\nHe maintained that \"upon these men lies the duty to inspire our ranks with high religious faith and zeal, and to cheer us on in the great mission of the slave's redemption from his chains\". In addition, he called religious people to embrace abolitionism, stating, \"let the religious press, the pulpit, the Sunday school, the conference meeting, the great ecclesiastical, missionary, Bible and tract associations of the land array their immense powers against slavery and slave-holding; and the whole system of crime and blood would be scattered to the winds.\"\nDuring his visits to the United Kingdom between 1846 and 1848, Douglass asked British Christians never to support American churches that permitted slavery, and he expressed his happiness to know that a group of ministers in Belfast had refused to admit slaveholders as members of the Church.\nOn his return to the United States, Douglass founded the \"North Star\", a weekly publication with the motto \"Right is of no sex, Truth is of no color, God is the Father of us all, and all we are Brethren.\" In his 1848 \"Letter to Thomas Auld\", Douglass denounced his former slaveholder for leaving Douglass's family illiterate:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSometimes considered a precursor of a non-denominational liberation theology, Douglass was a deeply spiritual man, as his home continues to show. The fireplace mantle features busts of two of his favorite philosophers, David Friedrich Strauss, author of \"The Life of Jesus\", and Ludwig Feuerbach, author of \"The Essence of Christianity\". In addition to several Bibles and books about various religions in the library, images of angels and Jesus are displayed, as well as interior and exterior photographs of Washington's Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church. Throughout his life, Douglass had linked that individual experience with social reform, and, according to John Stauffer, he, like other Christian abolitionists, \"tried to live righteously, abstaining from tobacco, alcohol and other perceived sins that corrupted body and soul\". Douglass stated himself that he was a teetotaler. According to David W. Blight, however, \"Douglass loved cigars\" and received them as gifts from Ottilie Assing.\nDouglass praised the agnostic orator Robert G. Ingersoll, whom Douglass met in Peoria, Illinois, stating, \"Genuine goodness is the same, whether found inside or outside the church, and that to be an 'infidel' no more proves a man to be selfish, mean and wicked than to be evangelical proves him to be honest, just and human. Perhaps there were Christian ministers and Christian families in Peoria at that time by whom I might have been received in the same gracious manner ... but in my former visits to this place I had failed to meet them\".\nFamily life.\nDouglass and Anna Murray had five children: Rosetta Douglass, Lewis Henry Douglass, Frederick Douglass Jr., Charles Remond Douglass, and Annie Douglass (died at the age of ten). Charles and Rosetta helped produce his newspapers.\nAnna Douglass remained a loyal supporter of her husband's public work. His relationships with Julia Griffiths and Ottilie Assing, two women with whom he was professionally involved, caused recurring speculation and scandals. Assing was a journalist recently immigrated from Germany, who first visited Douglass in 1856 seeking permission to translate \"My Bondage and My Freedom\" into German. Until 1872, she often stayed at his house \"for several months at a time\" as his \"intellectual and emotional companion\".\nAssing held Anna Douglass \"in utter contempt\" and was vainly hoping that Douglass would separate from his wife. Douglass biographer David W. Blight concludes that Assing and Douglass \"were probably lovers\". Though Douglass and Assing are widely believed to have had an intimate relationship, the surviving correspondence contains no proof of such a relationship.\nAnna died in 1882. In 1884, Douglass married Helen Pitts, a white suffragist and abolitionist from Honeoye, New York. Pitts was the daughter of Gideon Pitts Jr., an abolitionist colleague and friend of Douglass's. A graduate of Mount Holyoke College (then called Mount Holyoke Female Seminary), Pitts worked on a radical feminist publication named \"Alpha\" while living in Washington, D.C. She later worked as Douglass's secretary.\nAssing, who had depression and was diagnosed with incurable breast cancer, committed suicide in France in 1884 after hearing of the marriage. Upon her death, Assing bequeathed Douglass a $13,000 trust fund (), a \"large album\", and his choice of books from her library.\nThe marriage of Douglass and Pitts provoked a storm of controversy, since Pitts was both white and nearly 20 years younger. Many in her family stopped speaking to her; his children considered the marriage a repudiation of their mother. But feminist Elizabeth Cady Stanton congratulated the couple. Douglass responded to the criticisms by saying that his first marriage had been to someone the color of his mother, and his second to someone the color of his father.\nCareer.\nAbolitionist and preacher.\nFrederick Douglass and Anna Murray Douglass settled in New Bedford, Massachusetts (an abolitionist center, full of former enslaved people), in 1838, moving to Lynn, Massachusetts, in 1841. After meeting and staying with Nathan and Mary Johnson, they adopted Douglass as their married name. Douglass had grown up using his mother's surname of Bailey; after escaping slavery he had changed his surname first to Stanley and then to Johnson. In New Bedford, the latter was such a common name that he wanted one that was more distinctive, and asked Nathan Johnson to choose a suitable surname. Nathan suggested \"Douglass\", after having read the poem \"The Lady of the Lake\" by Walter Scott, in which two of the principal characters have the surname \"Douglas\".\nDouglass thought of joining a white Methodist Church, but was disappointed, from the beginning, upon finding that it was segregated. Later, he joined the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, an independent black denomination first established in New York City, which counted among its members Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman. He became a licensed preacher in 1839, which helped him to hone his oratorical skills. He held various positions, including steward, Sunday-school superintendent, and sexton. In 1840, Douglass delivered a speech in Elmira, New York, then a station on the Underground Railroad, in which a black congregation would form years later, becoming the region's largest church by 1940.\nDouglass also joined several organizations in New Bedford and regularly attended abolitionist meetings. He subscribed to William Lloyd Garrison's weekly newspaper, \"The Liberator\". He later said that \"no face and form ever impressed me with such sentiments [of the hatred of slavery] as did those of William Lloyd Garrison.\" So deep was this influence that in his last autobiography, Douglass said \"his paper took a place in my heart second only to The Bible.\"\nAlthough Garrison's ideas shaped Douglass's early activism, Douglass soon developed his own political views. Charles H. T. Lesch has shown that Douglass created a theory, which Lesch calls \"natural rights from below\", based on the experiences of enslaved people. Instead of relying on ideas from European philosophers, Douglass argued that, in order to understand freedom and equality, they must be seen from the perspective of those to whom they had been denied.\nDouglass's activism extended beyond abolition. He supported equal rights not only for African Americans but also for women, immigrants and poor people. His speeches and writings called for fairness and dignity for everyone which shows his belief in universal human rights, as it is shown in studies like \"https://.\"\nIn many of his speeches, Douglass exposed the gap between America's promises of freedom and the reality of slavery and racism. Scholars like https:// have made connections between Douglass's work to modern criticism of human rights, which shows how he challenged the ways the ways powerful groups such as American Democracy sometimes use rights to hide injustice.\nGarrison was likewise impressed with Douglass and had written about his anti-colonization stance in \"The Liberator\" as early as 1839. Douglass first heard Garrison speak in 1841, at a lecture that Garrison gave in Liberty Hall, New Bedford. At another meeting, Douglass was unexpectedly invited to speak. After telling his story, Douglass was encouraged to become an anti-slavery lecturer. A few days later, Douglass spoke at the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society's annual convention, in Nantucket. Then 23 years old, Douglass conquered his nervousness and gave an eloquent speech about his life as a slave.\nWhile living in Lynn, Douglass engaged in an early protest against segregated transportation. In September 1841, at Lynn Central Square station, Douglass and his friend James N. Buffum were thrown off an Eastern Railroad train because Douglass refused to sit in the segregated railroad coach.\nIn 1843, Douglass joined other speakers in the American Anti-Slavery Society's \"Hundred Conventions\" project, a six-month tour at meeting halls throughout the eastern and midwestern United States. During this tour, slavery supporters frequently accosted Douglass. At a lecture in Pendleton, Indiana, an angry mob chased and beat Douglass before a local Quaker family, the Hardys, rescued him. His hand was broken in the attack; it healed improperly and bothered him for the rest of his life. A stone marker in Falls Park in the Pendleton Historic District commemorates this event.\nIn 1847, Douglass explained to Garrison, \"I have no love for America, as such; I have no patriotism. I have no country. What country have I? The Institutions of this Country do not know me \u2013 do not recognize me as a man.\"\nAutobiography.\nDouglass's best-known work is his first autobiography, \"Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave\", written during his time in Lynn, Massachusetts and published in 1845. At the time, some skeptics questioned whether a black man could have produced such an eloquent piece of literature. The book received generally positive reviews and became an immediate bestseller. Within three years, it had been reprinted nine times, with 11,000 copies circulating in the United States. It was also translated into French and Dutch and published in Europe.\nDouglass published three autobiographies during his lifetime (and revised the third of these), each time expanding on the previous one. The 1845 \"Narrative\" was his biggest seller and probably allowed him to raise the funds to gain his legal freedom the following year, as discussed below. In 1855, Douglass published \"My Bondage and My Freedom\". In 1881, in his sixties, Douglass published \"Life and Times of Frederick Douglass\", which he revised in 1892.\nTravels to Ireland and Great Britain.\nDouglass's friends and mentors feared that the publicity would draw the attention of his ex-owner, Hugh Auld, who might try to get his \"property\" back. They encouraged Douglass to tour Ireland, as many former slaves had done. Douglass set sail on the \"Cambria\" for Liverpool, England, on August 16, 1845. He traveled in Ireland as the Great Famine was beginning.\nThe feeling of freedom from American racial discrimination amazed Douglass:\nEleven days and a half gone, and I have crossed three thousand miles of the perilous deep. Instead of a democratic government, I am under a monarchical government. Instead of the bright, blue sky of America, I am covered with the soft, grey fog of the Emerald Isle [Ireland]. I breathe, and lo! the chattel [slave] becomes a man. I gaze around in vain for one who will question my equal humanity, claim me as his slave, or offer me an insult. I employ a cab\u2014I am seated beside white people\u2014I reach the hotel\u2014I enter the same door\u2014I am shown into the same parlor\u2014I dine at the same table\u2014and no one is offended... I find myself regarded and treated at every turn with the kindness and deference paid to white people. When I go to church, I am met by no upturned nose and scornful lip to tell me, '\"We don't allow niggers in here!\"'\nStill, Douglass was astounded by the extreme levels of poverty he encountered in Dublin, much of it reminding him of his experiences in slavery. In a letter to William Lloyd Garrison, Douglass wrote \"I see much here to remind me of my former condition, and I confess I should be ashamed to lift up my voice against American slavery, but that I know the cause of humanity is one the world over. He who really and truly feels for the American slave, cannot steel his heart to the woes of others; and he who thinks himself an abolitionist, yet cannot enter into the wrongs of others, has yet to find a true foundation for his anti-slavery faith.\"\nHe also met and befriended the Irish nationalist and strident abolitionist Daniel O'Connell, who was to be a great inspiration.\nDouglass spent two years in Ireland and Great Britain, lecturing in churches and chapels. His draw was such that some facilities were \"crowded to suffocation\". One example was his hugely popular \"London Reception Speech\", which Douglass delivered in May 1846 at Alexander Fletcher's Finsbury Chapel. Douglass remarked that in England he was treated not \"as a color, but as a man\".\nIn 1846, Douglass met with Thomas Clarkson, one of the last living British abolitionists, who had persuaded Parliament to abolish slavery in Great Britain's colonies. During this trip Douglass became legally free, as British supporters led by Anna Richardson and her sister-in-law Ellen of Newcastle upon Tyne raised funds to buy his freedom from his American owner Thomas Auld. Many supporters tried to encourage Douglass to remain in England but, with his wife still in Massachusetts and three million of his black brethren in bondage in the United States, he returned to America in the spring of 1847, soon after the death of Daniel O'Connell.\nIn the 21st century, historical plaques were installed on buildings in Cork and Waterford, Ireland, and London to celebrate Douglass's visit: the first is on the Imperial Hotel in Cork and was unveiled on August 31, 2012; the second is on the fa\u00e7ade of Waterford City Hall, unveiled on October 7, 2013. It commemorates his speech there on October 9, 1845. The third plaque adorns Nell Gwynn House, South Kensington in London, at the site of an earlier house where Douglass stayed with the British abolitionist George Thompson. On July 31, 2023, the first statue of him in Europe was unveiled in High Street in Belfast.\nDouglass spent time in Scotland and was appointed \"Scotland's Antislavery agent\". He made anti-slavery speeches and wrote letters back to the US. He considered the city of Edinburgh to be elegant, grand and very welcoming. Maps of the places in the city that were important to his stay are held by the National Library of Scotland. A plaque and a mural at 33 Gilmore Place in Edinburgh mark his stay there in 1846.\n\"A variety of collaborative projects are currently [in 2021] underway to commemorate Frederick Douglass's journey and visit to Ireland in the 19th century.\"\nReturn to the United States; the abolitionist movement.\nAfter returning to the U.S. in 1847, using \u00a3500 () given to him by English supporters, Douglass started publishing his first abolitionist newspaper, the \"North Star\", from the basement of the Memorial AME Zion Church in Rochester, New York. Originally, Pittsburgh journalist Martin Delany was co-editor but Douglass didn't feel he brought in enough subscriptions, and they parted ways. The \"North Star\"'s motto was \"Right is of no Sex \u2013 Truth is of no Color \u2013 God is the Father of us all, and we are all brethren.\" The AME Church and \"North Star\" joined in the freedmen community's vigorous opposition to the mostly white American Colonization Society and its proposal to send free black people to Africa. Douglass also participated in the Underground Railroad. He and his wife provided lodging and resources in their home to more than four hundred fugitive slaves.\nDouglass also soon split with Garrison, whom he found unwilling to support actions against American slavery. Earlier Douglass had agreed with Garrison's position that the Constitution was pro-slavery, because of the Three-Fifths Clause, the compromise that provided that 60 percent of the number of enslaved people would be added to \"the whole Number of free Persons\" for the purpose of apportioning congressional seats; and protection of the international slave trade through 1807. Garrison had burned copies of the Constitution to express his opinion. However, Lysander Spooner published \"The Unconstitutionality of Slavery\" (1846), which examined the United States Constitution as an antislavery document. Douglass's change of opinion about the Constitution and his splitting from Garrison around 1847 became one of the abolitionist movement's most notable divisions. Douglass angered Garrison by saying that the Constitution could and should be used as an instrument in the fight against slavery.\nOn July 24, 1851, \"shortly after his announced change of opinion\", Douglass delivered a speech titled, \"Is the United States Constitution For or Against Slavery\". He expressed his changed views again in an 1860 speech in Glasgow, Scotland, titled, \"\". In that speech, he said, \"When I escaped from slavery, and was introduced to the Garrisonians, I adopted very many of their opinions... I was young, had read but little, and naturally took some things on trust. Subsequent reading and experience\", however, \"brought me to other conclusions\". He now believed that \"dissolution of the American Union\", which Garrison advocated, \"would place the slave system more exclusively under the control of the slaveholding States...\" In addition, \"Mr. Garrison and his friends tell us that while in the Union we are responsible for slavery... I deny that going out of the Union would free us from that responsibility... The American people in the Northern States have helped to enslave the black people. Their duty will not be done till they give them back their plundered rights.\"\nLetter to his former owner.\nIn September 1848, on the tenth anniversary of his escape, Douglass published an open letter addressed to his former master, Thomas Auld, berating him for his conduct, and inquiring after members of his family still held by Auld. In the course of the letter, Douglass adeptly transitions from formal and restrained to familiar and then to impassioned. At one point he is the proud parent, describing his improved circumstances and the progress of his own four young children. But then he dramatically shifts tone:\nOh! sir, a slaveholder never appears to me so completely an agent of hell, as when I think of and look upon my dear children. It is then that my feelings rise above my control. ... The grim horrors of slavery rise in all their ghastly terror before me, the wails of millions pierce my heart, and chill my blood. I remember the chain, the gag, the bloody whip, the deathlike gloom overshadowing the broken spirit of the fettered bondman, the appalling liability of his being torn away from wife and children, and sold like a beast in the market.\nIn a graphic passage, Douglass asked Auld how he would feel if Douglass had come to take away his daughter Amanda into slavery, treating her the way he and members of his family had been treated by Auld. Yet in his conclusion Douglass shows his focus and benevolence, stating that he has \"no malice towards him personally,\" and asserts that, \"there is no roof under which you would be more safe than mine, and there is nothing in my house which you might need for comfort, which I would not readily grant. Indeed, I should esteem it a privilege, to set you an example as to how mankind ought to treat each other.\"\nWomen's rights.\nIn 1848, Douglass was the only black person to attend the Seneca Falls Convention, the first women's rights convention, in upstate New York. Elizabeth Cady Stanton asked the assembly to pass a resolution asking for women's suffrage. Many of those present opposed the idea, including influential Quakers James and Lucretia Mott. Douglass stood and spoke eloquently in favor of women's suffrage; he said that he could not accept the right to vote as a black man if women could also not claim that right. He suggested that the world would be a better place if women were involved in the political sphere:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter Douglass's powerful words, the attendees passed the resolution.\nIn the wake of the Seneca Falls Convention, Douglass wrote an editorial in \"The North Star\" to press the case for women's rights. He recalled the \"marked ability and dignity\" of the proceedings and briefly conveyed several arguments of the convention and feminist thought of the time.\nOn the first count, Douglass acknowledged the \"decorum\" of the participants in the face of disagreement. In the remainder, he discussed the primary document that emerged from the conference, a Declaration of Sentiments, and the \"infant\" feminist cause. He criticized opponents of women's rights: \"A discussion of the rights of animals would be regarded with far more complacency by many of what are called the \"wise\" and the \"good\" of our land, than would be a discussion of the rights of woman.\" He also noted the link between abolitionism and feminism, the overlap between the communities.\nHis opinion as the editor of a prominent newspaper carried weight, and he stated the position of the \"North Star\" explicitly: \"We hold woman to be justly entitled to all we claim for man.\" This letter, written a week after the convention, reaffirmed the first part of the paper's slogan, \"right is of no sex.\"\nAfter the Civil War, when the 15th Amendment giving black men the right to vote was being debated, Douglass split with the Stanton-led faction of the women's rights movement. Douglass supported the amendment, which would grant suffrage to black men. Stanton opposed the 15th Amendment because it limited the expansion of suffrage to black men; she predicted its passage would delay for decades the cause for women's right to vote. Stanton argued that American women and black men should band together to fight for universal suffrage, and opposed any bill that split the issues. Douglass and Stanton both knew that there was not yet enough male support for women's right to vote, but that an amendment giving black men the vote could pass in the late 1860s. Stanton wanted to attach women's suffrage to that of black men so that her cause would be carried to success.\nDouglass thought such a strategy was too risky, that there was barely enough support for black men's suffrage. He feared that linking the cause of women's suffrage to that of black men would result in failure for both. Douglass argued that white women, already empowered by their social connections to fathers, husbands, and brothers, at least vicariously had the vote. Black women, he believed, would have the same degree of empowerment as white women once black men had the vote. Douglass assured the American women that at no time had he ever argued against women's right to vote.\nIdeological refinement.\nIn 1850, Douglass was elected the vice president of the American League of Colored Laborers, the first black labor union in the United States, which he had also helped found. Meanwhile, in 1851, he merged the \"North Star\" with Gerrit Smith's Liberty Party paper to form \"Frederick Douglass' Paper\", which was published until 1859.\nOn July 5, 1852, Douglass delivered an address in Corinthian Hall at a meeting organized by the Rochester Ladies' Anti-Slavery Society. This speech eventually became known as \"What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?\"; one biographer called it \"perhaps the greatest antislavery oration ever given.\" In 1853, he was a prominent attendee of the radical abolitionist National African American Convention in Rochester. Douglass was one of five people whose names were attached to the address of the convention to the people of the United States published under the title, \"The Claims of Our Common Cause\". The other four were Amos No\u00eb Freeman, James Monroe Whitfield, Henry O. Wagoner, and George Boyer Vashon.\nLike many abolitionists, Douglass believed that education would be crucial for African Americans to improve their lives; he was an early advocate for school desegregation. In the 1850s, Douglass observed that New York's facilities and instruction for African American children were vastly inferior to those for European Americans. Douglass called for court action to open all schools to all children. He said that full inclusion within the educational system was a more pressing need for African Americans than political issues such as suffrage.\nJohn Brown.\nOn March 12, 1859, Douglass met with radical abolitionists John Brown, George DeBaptiste, and others at William Webb's house in Detroit to discuss emancipation. Douglass met Brown again when Brown visited his home two months before leading the raid on Harpers Ferry. Brown penned his Provisional Constitution during his two-week stay with Douglass. Also staying with Douglass for over a year was Shields Green, a fugitive slave whom Douglass was helping, as he often did.\nShortly before the raid, Douglass, taking Green with him, travelled from Rochester, via New York City, to Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, Brown's communications headquarters. He was recognized there by black people, who asked him for a lecture. Douglass agreed, although he said his only topic was slavery. Green joined him on the stage; Brown, incognito, sat in the audience. A white reporter, referring to \"Nigger Democracy\", called it a \"flaming address\" by \"the notorious Negro Orator\".\nThere, in an abandoned stone quarry for secrecy, Douglass and Green met with Brown and John Henri Kagi, to discuss the raid. After discussions lasting, as Douglass put it, \"a day and a night\", he disappointed Brown by declining to join him, considering the mission suicidal. To Douglass's surprise, Green went with Brown instead of returning to Rochester with Douglass. Anne Brown said that Green told her that Douglass promised to pay him on his return, but David Blight called this \"much more ex post facto bitterness than reality\".\nAlmost all that is known about this incident comes from Douglass. It is clear that it was of immense importance to him, both as a turning point in his life\u2014not accompanying John Brown\u2014and its importance in his public image. The meeting was not revealed by Douglass for 20 years. He first disclosed it in his speech on John Brown at Storer College in 1881, trying unsuccessfully to raise money to support a John Brown professorship at Storer, to be held by a black man. He again referred to it stunningly in his last \"Autobiography\".\nAfter the raid, which took place between October 16 and 18, 1859, Douglass was accused both of supporting Brown and of not supporting him enough. He was nearly arrested on a Virginia warrant, and fled for a brief time to Canada before proceeding onward to England on a previously planned lecture tour, arriving near the end of November. During his lecture tour of Great Britain, on March 26, 1860, Douglass delivered a speech before the Scottish Anti-Slavery Society in Glasgow, \"\", outlining his views on the American Constitution. That month, on the 13th, Douglass's youngest daughter Annie died in Rochester, New York, at age 10. Douglass sailed back from England the following month, traveling through Canada to avoid detection.\nYears later, in 1881, Douglass shared a stage at Storer College in Harpers Ferry with Andrew Hunter, the prosecutor who secured Brown's conviction and execution. Hunter congratulated Douglass.\nPhotography.\nDouglass considered photography very important in ending slavery and racism, and believed that the camera would not lie, even in the hands of a racist white person, as photographs were an excellent counter to many racist caricatures, particularly in blackface minstrelsy. He was the most photographed American of the 19th century, consciously using photography to advance his political views. He never smiled, specifically so as not to play into the racist caricature of a happy enslaved person. He tended to look directly into the camera and confront the viewer with a stern look.\nCivil War years.\nBefore the Civil War.\nBy the time of the Civil War, Douglass was one of the most famous black men in the country, known for his orations on the condition of the black race and on other issues such as women's rights. His eloquence gathered crowds at every location. His reception by leaders in England and Ireland added to his stature.\nHe had been seriously proposed for the congressional seat of his friend and supporter Gerrit Smith, who declined to run again after his term ended in 1854. Smith recommended to him that he not run, because there were \"strenuous objections\" from members of Congress. The possibility \"afflicted some with convulsions, others with panic, more with an astonishing flow of exceedingly select and nervous language\", \"giving vent to all sorts of linguistic enormities.\" If the House agreed to seat him, which was unlikely, all the Southern members would walk out, so the country would finally be split. No black person would serve in Congress until 1870, just after the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment.\nFight for emancipation and suffrage.\nDouglass and the abolitionists argued that because the aim of the Civil War was to end slavery, African Americans should be allowed to engage in the fight for their freedom. Douglass publicized this view in his newspapers and several speeches. After Lincoln had finally allowed black soldiers to serve in the Union army, Douglass helped the recruitment efforts, publishing his famous broadside \"Men of Color to Arms!\" on March 21, 1863. His eldest son, Charles Douglass, joined the 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment, but was ill for much of his service. Lewis Douglass fought at the Battle of Fort Wagner. Another son, Frederick Douglass Jr., also served as a recruiter.\nWith the North no longer obliged to return slaves to their owners in the South, Douglass fought for equality for his people. Douglass conferred with President Abraham Lincoln in 1863 on the treatment of black soldiers and on plans to move liberated slaves out of the South.\nPresident Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation, which took effect on January 1, 1863, declared the freedom of all slaves in Confederate-held territory. (Slaves in Union-held areas were not covered because the proclamation was deemed permissible under the Constitution only as a war measure; they were freed with the adoption of the 13th Amendment on December 6, 1865.) Douglass described the spirit of those awaiting the proclamation: \"We were waiting and listening as for a bolt from the sky ... we were watching ... by the dim light of the stars for the dawn of a new day ... we were longing for the answer to the agonizing prayers of centuries.\"\nDuring the U.S. Presidential Election of 1864, Douglass supported John C. Fr\u00e9mont, who was the candidate of the abolitionist Radical Democratic Party. Douglass was disappointed that President Lincoln did not publicly endorse suffrage for black freedmen. Douglass believed that since African American men were fighting for the Union, they deserved the right to vote.\nAfter Lincoln's death.\nThe postwar ratification of the 13th Amendment, on December 6, 1865, outlawed slavery, \"except as a punishment for crime.\" The 14th Amendment provided for birthright citizenship and prohibited the states from abridging the privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States or denying any \"person\" due process of law or equal protection of the laws. The 15th Amendment protected all citizens from being discriminated against in voting because of race. After Lincoln had been assassinated, Douglass conferred with President Andrew Johnson on the subject of black suffrage.\nOn April 14, 1876, Douglass delivered the keynote speech at the unveiling of the Emancipation Memorial in Washington's Lincoln Park. He spoke frankly about the complex legacy of Lincoln, noting what he perceived as both positive and negative attributes of the late President. Calling Lincoln \"the white man's President\", Douglass criticized Lincoln's tardiness in joining the cause of emancipation, noting that Lincoln initially opposed the expansion of slavery but did not support its elimination: \"He had been ready and willing at any time during the first years of his administration to deny, postpone, and sacrifice the humanity of the colored people to promote the welfare of the white people. Lincoln was neither our man or our model\". But Douglass also asked, \"Can any colored man, or any white man friendly to the freedom of all men, ever forget the night which followed the first day of January 1863, when the world was to see if Abraham Lincoln would prove to be as good as his word?\" He also said: \"Though Mr. Lincoln shared the prejudices of his white fellow-countrymen against the Negro, it is hardly necessary to say that in his heart of hearts he loathed and hated slavery...\" Most famously, he added: \"Viewed from the genuine abolition ground, Mr. Lincoln seemed tardy, cold, dull, and indifferent; but measuring him by the sentiment of his country, a sentiment he was bound as a statesman to consult, he was swift, zealous, radical, and determined.\"\nThe crowd, roused by his speech, gave Douglass a standing ovation. Lincoln's widow Mary Lincoln supposedly gave Lincoln's favorite walking-stick to Douglass in appreciation. That walking stick still rests in his final residence, \"Cedar Hill\" in Washington, D.C., now preserved as the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site.\nAfter delivering the speech, Douglass immediately wrote to the National Republican newspaper in Washington (which published his letter five days later, on April 19), criticizing the statue's design and suggesting the park could be improved by more dignified monuments of free black people. \"The negro here, though rising, is still on his knees and nude,\" Douglass wrote. \"What I want to see before I die is a monument representing the negro, not couchant on his knees like a four-footed animal, but erect on his feet like a man.\"\nReconstruction era.\nAfter the Civil War, Douglass continued to work for equality for African Americans and women. Due to his prominence and activism during the war, Douglass received several political appointments. He served as president of the Reconstruction-era Freedman's Savings Bank.\nMeanwhile, white insurgents had quickly arisen in the South after the war, organizing first as secret vigilante groups, including the Ku Klux Klan. Armed insurgency took different forms. Powerful paramilitary groups included the White League and the Red Shirts, both active during the 1870s in the Deep South. They operated as \"the military arm of the Democratic Party\", turning out Republican officeholders and disrupting elections. Starting 10 years after the war, Democrats regained political power in every state of the former Confederacy and began to reassert white supremacy. They enforced this by a combination of violence, late 19th-century laws imposing segregation and a concerted effort to disfranchise African Americans. New labor and criminal laws also limited their freedom.\nTo combat these efforts, Douglass supported the presidential campaign of Ulysses S. Grant in 1868. In 1870, Douglass started his last newspaper, the \"New National Era\", attempting to hold his country to its commitment to equality. President Grant sent a congressionally sponsored commission, accompanied by Douglass, on a mission to the West Indies to investigate whether the annexation of Santo Domingo would be good for the United States. Grant believed annexation would help relieve the violent situation in the South by allowing African Americans their own state. Douglass and the commission favored annexation, but Congress remained opposed to annexation. Douglass criticized Senator Charles Sumner, who opposed annexation, stating that if Sumner continued to oppose annexation he would \"regard him as the worst foe the colored race has on this continent.\"\nAfter the midterm elections, Grant signed the Civil Rights Act of 1871 (also known as the Ku Klux Klan Act) and the second and third Enforcement Acts. Grant used their provisions vigorously, suspending \"habeas corpus\" in South Carolina and sending troops there and into other states. Under his leadership over 5,000 arrests were made. Grant's vigor in disrupting the Klan made him unpopular among many whites but earned praise from Douglass. A Douglass associate wrote that African Americans \"will ever cherish a grateful remembrance of [Grant's] name, fame and great services.\"\nIn 1872, Douglass became the first African American nominated for Vice President of the United States, as Victoria Woodhull's running mate on the Equal Rights Party ticket. He was nominated without his knowledge. Douglass neither campaigned for the ticket nor acknowledged that he had been nominated. In that year, he was presidential elector at large for the State of New York, and took that state's votes to Washington, D.C.\nHowever, in early June of that year, Douglass's third Rochester home, on South Avenue, burned down; arson was suspected. There was extensive damage to the house, its furnishings, and the grounds; in addition, sixteen volumes of the \"North Star\" and \"Frederick Douglass' Paper\" were lost. Douglass then moved to Washington, D.C.\nThroughout the Reconstruction era, Douglass continued speaking, emphasizing the importance of work, voting rights and actual exercise of suffrage. His speeches for the twenty-five years following the war emphasized work to counter the racism that was then prevalent in unions. In a November 15, 1867, speech he said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"A man's rights rest in three boxes. The ballot box, jury box, and the cartridge box. Let no man be kept from the ballot box because of his color. Let no woman be kept from the ballot box because of her sex.\"In an 1869 speech entitled \"Our Composite Nationality,\" Douglass spoke in defense of Chinese immigration to the United States, their admission \"as witnesses in our courts of law\", their naturalization as citizens, and their right to vote and to hold office. This was at a time when even many fellow Republicans expressed anti-Chinese sentiment and opposed their immigration and the other rights that Douglass named. Describing the freedom to immigrate as a human right, Douglass argued, \"I hold that a liberal and brotherly welcome to all who are likely to come to the United States is the only wise policy which this nation can adopt.\" \nDouglass spoke at many colleges around the country, including Bates College in Lewiston, Maine, in 1873.\nIn 1881, at Storer College in Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, Douglass delivered a speech praising John Brown and revealing unknown information about their relationship, including their meeting in an abandoned stone quarry near Chambersburg shortly before the raid.\nFrederick Douglass House.\nIn 1877 Frederick Douglass bought a house in Washington, D.C., that included a big yard, as well as a studio where he did most of his work; he lived in this house from 1878 until his death in 1895, and it was named the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site.\nFinal years in Washington, D.C..\nThe Freedman's Savings Bank went bankrupt on June 29, 1874, just a few months after Douglass became its president in late March. During that same economic crisis, his final newspaper, \"The New National Era\", failed in September. When Republican Rutherford B. Hayes was elected president, he named Douglass United States Marshal for the District of Columbia, making him the first person of color to be so named. The United States Senate voted to confirm him on March 17, 1877. Douglass accepted the appointment, which helped assure his family's financial security. During his tenure, Douglass was urged by his supporters to resign from his commission, since he was never asked to introduce visiting foreign dignitaries to the President, which is one of the usual duties of that post. However, Douglass believed that no covert racism was implied by the omission and stated that he was always warmly welcomed in presidential circles.\nIn 1877, Douglass visited his former enslaver Thomas Auld on his deathbed, and the two men reconciled. Douglass had met Auld's daughter, Amanda Auld Sears, some years prior. She had requested the meeting and had subsequently attended and cheered one of Douglass's speeches. Her father complimented her for reaching out to Douglass. The visit also appears to have brought closure to Douglass, although some criticized his effort.\nThat same year, Douglass bought the house that was to be the family's final home in Washington, D.C., on a hill above the Anacostia River. He and Anna named it \"Cedar Hill\" (also spelled \"CedarHill\"). They expanded the house from 14 to 21 rooms and included a china closet. One year later, Douglass purchased adjoining lots and expanded the property to 15\u00a0acres (61,000\u00a0m2). The home is now preserved as the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site.\nIn 1881, Douglass published the final edition of his autobiography, \"The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass\", which he updated in 1892. In 1881, he was appointed Recorder of Deeds for the District of Columbia. His wife Anna Murray Douglass died in 1882, leaving the widower devastated. After a period of mourning, Douglass found new meaning from working with activist Ida B. Wells. He remarried in 1884, as mentioned above.\nDouglass also continued his speaking engagements and travel, both in the United States and abroad. With new wife Helen, Douglass toured the UK including Wales (possibly by invitation from abolitionist Jessie Donaldson), Ireland, France, Italy, Egypt, and Greece from 1886 to 1887. He became known for advocating Irish Home Rule and supported Charles Stewart Parnell in Ireland.\nAt the 1888 Republican National Convention, Douglass became the first African American to receive a vote for President of the United States in a major party's roll call vote. That year, Douglass spoke at Claflin College, a historically black college in Orangeburg, South Carolina, and the state's oldest such institution.\nMany African Americans, called Exodusters, escaped the Klan and racially discriminatory laws in the South by moving to Kansas, where some formed all-black towns to have a greater level of freedom and autonomy. Douglass favored neither this nor the Back-to-Africa movement. He thought the latter resembled the American Colonization Society, which he had opposed in his youth. In 1892, at an Indianapolis conference convened by Bishop Henry McNeal Turner, Douglass spoke out against the separatist movements, urging African Americans to stick it out. He made similar speeches as early as 1879 and was criticized both by fellow leaders and some audiences, who even booed him for this position. Speaking in Baltimore in 1894, Douglass said, \"I hope and trust all will come out right in the end, but the immediate future looks dark and troubled. I cannot shut my eyes to the ugly facts before me.\"\nPresident Harrison appointed Douglass as the United States's minister resident and consul-general to the Republic of Haiti and Charg\u00e9 d'affaires for Santo Domingo in 1889, but Douglass resigned the commission in July 1891 when it became apparent that the American President was intent upon gaining permanent access to Haitian territory regardless of that country's desires. In 1892, Haiti made Douglass a co-commissioner of its pavilion at the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago.\nIn 1892, Douglass constructed rental housing for blacks, now known as Douglass Place, in the Fells Point area of Baltimore. The complex still exists, and in 2003 was listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nDeath.\nOn February 20, 1895, Douglass attended a meeting of the National Council of Women in Washington, D.C. During that meeting, he was brought to the platform and received a standing ovation. Shortly after he returned home, Douglass died of a heart attack. Because the exact date of his birth is unclear, he would have been either 76 or 77 \u2014 76 if he were born after February 20, 1818, or 77 if he were born before or on February 20th, 1818.\nHis funeral was held at the Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church. Although Douglass had attended several churches in the nation's capital, he had a pew here and had donated two standing candelabras when this church had moved to a new building in 1886. He also gave many lectures there, including his last major speech, \"The Lessons of the Hour\".\nThousands of people passed by his coffin to show their respect. United States senators and Supreme Court justices were pallbearers. Jeremiah Rankin, president of Howard University, delivered \"a masterly address\". A letter from Elizabeth Cady Stanton was read. The Secretary of the Haitian Legation \"expressed the condolence of his country in melodious French.\"\nDouglass's coffin was transported to Rochester, New York, where he had lived for 25 years, longer than anywhere else in his life. His body was received in state at City Hall, flags were flown at half mast, and schools adjourned. He was buried next to Anna in the Douglass family plot of Mount Hope Cemetery. Helen was also buried there, in 1903. His grave is, with that of Susan B. Anthony, the most visited in the cemetery. A marker, erected by the University of Rochester and other friends, describes him as \"escaped slave, abolitionist, suffragist, journalist and statesman. Founder of the civil rights movement in America\".\nLegacy and honors.\nBiographer David Blight states that Douglass \"played a pivotal role in America's Second Founding out of the apocalypse of the Civil War, and he very much wished to see himself as a founder and a defender of the Second American Republic.\"\nRoy Finkenbine argues:\nThe most influential African American of the nineteenth century, Douglass made a career of agitating the American conscience. He spoke and wrote on behalf of a variety of reform causes: women's rights, temperance, peace, land reform, free public education, and the abolition of capital punishment. But he devoted the bulk of his time, immense talent, and boundless energy to ending slavery and gaining equal rights for African Americans. These were the central concerns of his long reform career. Douglass understood that the struggle for emancipation and equality demanded forceful, persistent, and unyielding agitation. And he recognized that African Americans must play a conspicuous role in that struggle. Less than a month before his death, when a young black man solicited his advice to an African American just starting out in the world, Douglass replied without hesitation: \u2033Agitate! Agitate! Agitate!\u2033\nIn his later years, Douglass spoke out against segregated education, arguing that separate schools for Black children kept them unequal and went against the goals of emancipation. He viewed access to good education as essential for African Americans to achieve full citizenship and take part in democracy. Douglass insisted that literacy was not just a personal achievement but a shared right. His views on education influenced later generations of Black educators and civil rights leaders who also saw learning learning as a key part of the fight for racial justice. \u00a0\nThe Episcopal Church remembers Douglass with a Lesser Feast annually on its liturgical calendar for February 20, the anniversary of his death. Many public schools have also been named in his honor. Douglass still has living descendants today, such as Ken Morris, who is also a descendant of Booker T. Washington. Other honors and remembrances include:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11034", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11034", "title": "Fluid dynamics", "text": "Aspects of fluid mechanics involving fluid flow\nIn physics, physical chemistry, and engineering, fluid dynamics is a subdiscipline of fluid mechanics that describes the flow of fluids \u2013 liquids and gases. It has several subdisciplines, including aerodynamics (the study of air and other gases in motion) and hydrodynamics (the study of water and other liquids in motion). Fluid dynamics has a wide range of applications, including calculating forces and moments on aircraft, determining the mass flow rate of petroleum through pipelines, predicting weather patterns, understanding nebulae in interstellar space, understanding large scale geophysical flows involving oceans/atmosphere and modelling fission weapon detonation.\nFluid dynamics offers a systematic structure\u2014which underlies these practical disciplines\u2014that embraces empirical and semi-empirical laws derived from flow measurement and used to solve practical problems. The solution to a fluid dynamics problem typically involves the calculation of various properties of the fluid, such as flow velocity, pressure, density, and temperature, as functions of space and time.\nBefore the twentieth century, \"hydrodynamics\" was synonymous with fluid dynamics. This is still reflected in names of some fluid dynamics topics, like magnetohydrodynamics and hydrodynamic stability, both of which can also be applied to gases.\nEquations.\nThe foundational axioms of fluid dynamics are the conservation laws, specifically, conservation of mass, conservation of linear momentum, and conservation of energy (also known as the \"first law of thermodynamics\"). These are based on classical mechanics and are modified in quantum mechanics and general relativity. They are expressed using the Reynolds transport theorem.\nIn addition to the above, fluids are assumed to obey the continuum assumption. At small scale, all fluids are composed of molecules that collide with one another and solid objects. However, the continuum assumption assumes that fluids are continuous, rather than discrete. Consequently, it is assumed that properties such as density, pressure, temperature, and flow velocity are well-defined at infinitesimally small points in space and vary continuously from one point to another. The fact that the fluid is made up of discrete molecules is ignored.\nFor fluids that are sufficiently dense to be a continuum, do not contain ionized species, and have flow velocities that are small in relation to the speed of light, the momentum equations for Newtonian fluids are the Navier\u2013Stokes equations\u2014which is a non-linear set of differential equations that describes the flow of a fluid whose stress depends linearly on flow velocity gradients and pressure. The unsimplified equations do not have a general closed-form solution, so they are primarily of use in computational fluid dynamics. The equations can be simplified in several ways, all of which make them easier to solve. Some of the simplifications allow some simple fluid dynamics problems to be solved in closed form.\nIn addition to the mass, momentum, and energy conservation equations, a thermodynamic equation of state that gives the pressure as a function of other thermodynamic variables is required to completely describe the problem. An example of this would be the perfect gas equation of state:\nformula_1\nwhere p is pressure, \u03c1 is density, and T is the absolute temperature, while Ru is the gas constant and M is molar mass for a particular gas. A constitutive relation may also be useful.\nConservation laws.\nThree conservation laws are used to solve fluid dynamics problems, and may be written in integral or differential form. The conservation laws may be applied to a region of the flow called a \"control volume\". A control volume is a discrete volume in space through which fluid is assumed to flow. The integral formulations of the conservation laws are used to describe the change of mass, momentum, or energy within the control volume. Differential formulations of the conservation laws apply Stokes' theorem to yield an expression that may be interpreted as the integral form of the law applied to an infinitesimally small volume (at a point) within the flow.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassifications.\nCompressible versus incompressible flow.\nAll fluids are compressible to an extent; that is, changes in pressure or temperature cause changes in density. However, in many situations the changes in pressure and temperature are sufficiently small that the changes in density are negligible. In this case the flow can be modelled as an incompressible flow. Otherwise the more general compressible flow equations must be used.\nMathematically, incompressibility is expressed by saying that the density \u03c1 of a fluid parcel does not change as it moves in the flow field, that is,\nformula_2\nwhere is the material derivative, which is the sum of local and convective derivatives. This additional constraint simplifies the governing equations, especially in the case when the fluid has a uniform density.\nFor flow of gases, to determine whether to use compressible or incompressible fluid dynamics, the Mach number of the flow is evaluated. As a rough guide, compressible effects can be ignored at Mach numbers below approximately 0.3. For liquids, whether the incompressible assumption is valid depends on the fluid properties (specifically the critical pressure and temperature of the fluid) and the flow conditions (how close to the critical pressure the actual flow pressure becomes). Acoustic problems always require allowing compressibility, since sound waves are compression waves involving changes in pressure and density of the medium through which they propagate.\nNewtonian versus non-Newtonian fluids.\nAll fluids, except superfluids, are viscous, meaning that they exert some resistance to deformation: neighbouring parcels of fluid moving at different velocities exert viscous forces on each other. The velocity gradient is referred to as a strain rate; it has dimensions \"T\"\u22121. Isaac Newton showed that for many familiar fluids such as water and air, the stress due to these viscous forces is linearly related to the strain rate. Such fluids are called Newtonian fluids. The coefficient of proportionality is called the fluid's viscosity; for Newtonian fluids, it is a fluid property that is independent of the strain rate.\nNon-Newtonian fluids have a more complicated, non-linear stress-strain behaviour. The sub-discipline of rheology describes the stress-strain behaviours of such fluids, which include emulsions and slurries, some viscoelastic materials such as blood and some polymers, and \"sticky liquids\" such as latex, honey and lubricants.\nInviscid versus viscous versus Stokes flow.\nThe dynamic of fluid parcels is described with the help of Newton's second law. An accelerating parcel of fluid is subject to inertial effects.\nThe Reynolds number is a dimensionless quantity which characterises the magnitude of inertial effects compared to the magnitude of viscous effects. A low Reynolds number (\"Re\" \u226a 1) indicates that viscous forces are very strong compared to inertial forces. In such cases, inertial forces are sometimes neglected; this flow regime is called Stokes or creeping flow.\nIn contrast, high Reynolds numbers (\"Re\" \u226b 1) indicate that the inertial effects have more effect on the velocity field than the viscous (friction) effects. In high Reynolds number flows, the flow is often modeled as an inviscid flow, an approximation in which viscosity is completely neglected. Eliminating viscosity allows the Navier\u2013Stokes equations to be simplified into the Euler equations. The integration of the Euler equations along a streamline in an inviscid flow yields Bernoulli's equation. When, in addition to being inviscid, the flow is irrotational everywhere, Bernoulli's equation can completely describe the flow everywhere. Such flows are called potential flows, because the velocity field may be expressed as the gradient of a potential energy expression.\nThis idea can work fairly well when the Reynolds number is high. However, problems such as those involving solid boundaries may require that the viscosity be included. Viscosity cannot be neglected near solid boundaries because the no-slip condition generates a thin region of large strain rate, the boundary layer, in which viscosity effects dominate and which thus generates vorticity. Therefore, to calculate net forces on bodies (such as wings), viscous flow equations must be used: inviscid flow theory fails to predict drag forces, a limitation known as the d'Alembert's paradox.\nA commonly used model, especially in computational fluid dynamics, is to use two flow models: the Euler equations away from the body, and boundary layer equations in a region close to the body. The two solutions can then be matched with each other, using the method of matched asymptotic expansions.\nSteady versus unsteady flow.\nA flow that is not a function of time is called steady flow. Steady-state flow refers to the condition where the fluid properties at a point in the system do not change over time. Time dependent flow is known as unsteady (also called transient). Whether a particular flow is steady or unsteady, can depend on the chosen frame of reference. For instance, laminar flow over a sphere is steady in the frame of reference that is stationary with respect to the sphere. In a frame of reference that is stationary with respect to a background flow, the flow is unsteady.\nTurbulent flows are unsteady by definition. A turbulent flow can, however, be statistically stationary. The random velocity field \"U\"(\"x\", \"t\") is statistically stationary if all statistics are invariant under a shift in time. This roughly means that all statistical properties are constant in time. Often, the mean field is the object of interest, and this is constant too in a statistically stationary flow.\nSteady flows are often more tractable than otherwise similar unsteady flows. The governing equations of a steady problem have one dimension fewer (time) than the governing equations of the same problem without taking advantage of the steadiness of the flow field.\nLaminar versus turbulent flow.\nTurbulence is flow characterized by recirculation, eddies, and apparent randomness. Flow in which turbulence is not exhibited is called laminar. The presence of eddies or recirculation alone does not necessarily indicate turbulent flow\u2014these phenomena may be present in laminar flow as well. Mathematically, turbulent flow is often represented via a Reynolds decomposition, in which the flow is broken down into the sum of an average component and a perturbation component.\nIt is believed that turbulent flows can be described well through the use of the Navier\u2013Stokes equations. Direct numerical simulation (DNS), based on the Navier\u2013Stokes equations, makes it possible to simulate turbulent flows at moderate Reynolds numbers. Restrictions depend on the power of the computer used and the efficiency of the solution algorithm. The results of DNS have been found to agree well with experimental data for some flows.\nMost flows of interest have Reynolds numbers much too high for DNS to be a viable option, given the state of computational power for the next few decades. Any flight vehicle large enough to carry a human (L &gt; 3\u00a0m), moving faster than is well beyond the limit of DNS simulation (Re = 4\u00a0million). Transport aircraft wings (such as on an Airbus A300 or Boeing 747) have Reynolds numbers of 40 million (based on the wing chord dimension). Solving these real-life flow problems requires turbulence models for the foreseeable future. Reynolds-averaged Navier\u2013Stokes equations (RANS) combined with turbulence modelling provides a model of the effects of the turbulent flow. Such a modelling mainly provides the additional momentum transfer by the Reynolds stresses, although the turbulence also enhances the heat and mass transfer. Another promising methodology is large eddy simulation (LES), especially in the form of detached eddy simulation (DES) \u2014 a combination of LES and RANS turbulence modelling.\nOther approximations.\nThere are a large number of other possible approximations to fluid dynamic problems. Some of the more commonly used are listed below.\nMultidisciplinary types.\nFlows according to Mach regimes.\nWhile many flows (such as flow of water through a pipe) occur at low Mach numbers (subsonic flows), many flows of practical interest in aerodynamics or in turbomachines occur at high fractions of \"M\" \n[[Category:Pages which use a template in place of a magic word|TFluid dynamics]] 1 (transonic flows) or in excess of it (supersonic or even hypersonic flows). New phenomena occur at these regimes such as instabilities in transonic flow, shock waves for supersonic flow, or non-equilibrium chemical behaviour due to ionization in hypersonic flows. In practice, each of those flow regimes is treated separately.\nReactive versus non-reactive flows.\nReactive flows are flows that are chemically reactive, which finds its applications in many areas, including combustion (IC engine), propulsion devices (rockets, jet engines, and so on), detonations, fire and safety hazards, and astrophysics. In addition to conservation of mass, momentum and energy, conservation of individual species (for example, mass fraction of methane in methane combustion) need to be derived, where the production/depletion rate of any species are obtained by simultaneously solving the equations of chemical kinetics.\nMagnetohydrodynamics.\nMagnetohydrodynamics is the multidisciplinary study of the flow of electrically conducting fluids in electromagnetic fields. Examples of such fluids include plasmas, liquid metals, and salt water. The fluid flow equations are solved simultaneously with Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism.\nRelativistic fluid dynamics.\nRelativistic fluid dynamics studies the macroscopic and microscopic fluid motion at large velocities comparable to the velocity of light. This branch of fluid dynamics accounts for the relativistic effects both from the special theory of relativity and the general theory of relativity. The governing equations are derived in Riemannian geometry for Minkowski spacetime.\nFluctuating hydrodynamics.\nThis branch of fluid dynamics augments the standard hydrodynamic equations with stochastic fluxes that model \nthermal fluctuations.\nAs formulated by Landau and Lifshitz,\na white noise contribution obtained from the fluctuation-dissipation theorem of statistical mechanics\nis added to the viscous stress tensor and heat flux.\nTerminology.\nThe concept of pressure is central to the study of both fluid statics and fluid dynamics. A pressure can be identified for every point in a body of fluid, regardless of whether the fluid is in motion or not. Pressure can be measured using an aneroid, Bourdon tube, mercury column, or various other methods.\nSome of the terminology that is necessary in the study of fluid dynamics is not found in other similar areas of study. In particular, some of the terminology used in fluid dynamics is not used in fluid statics.\nTerminology in incompressible fluid dynamics.\nThe concepts of total pressure and dynamic pressure arise from Bernoulli's equation and are significant in the study of all fluid flows. (These two pressures are not pressures in the usual sense\u2014they cannot be measured using an aneroid, Bourdon tube or mercury column.) To avoid potential ambiguity when referring to pressure in fluid dynamics, many authors use the term static pressure to distinguish it from total pressure and dynamic pressure. Static pressure is identical to pressure and can be identified for every point in a fluid flow field.\nA point in a fluid flow where the flow has come to rest (that is to say, speed is equal to zero adjacent to some solid body immersed in the fluid flow) is of special significance. It is of such importance that it is given a special name\u2014a stagnation point. The static pressure at the stagnation point is of special significance and is given its own name\u2014stagnation pressure. In incompressible flows, the stagnation pressure at a stagnation point is equal to the total pressure throughout the flow field.\nTerminology in compressible fluid dynamics.\nIn a compressible fluid, it is convenient to define the total conditions (also called stagnation conditions) for all thermodynamic state properties (such as total temperature, total enthalpy, total speed of sound). These total flow conditions are a function of the fluid velocity and have different values in frames of reference with different motion.\nTo avoid potential ambiguity when referring to the properties of the fluid associated with the state of the fluid rather than its motion, the prefix \"static\" is commonly used (such as static temperature and static enthalpy). Where there is no prefix, the fluid property is the static condition (so \"density\" and \"static density\" mean the same thing). The static conditions are independent of the frame of reference.\nBecause the total flow conditions are defined by isentropically bringing the fluid to rest, there is no need to distinguish between total entropy and static entropy as they are always equal by definition. As such, entropy is most commonly referred to as simply \"entropy\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11036", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11036", "title": "Fin", "text": "Thin component or appendage attached to a larger body or structure\nA fin is a thin appendage or component attached to a larger body or structure. Fins typically function as foils that produce lift or thrust, or provide the ability to steer or stabilize motion while traveling in water, air, or other fluids. Fins are also used to increase surface areas for heat transfer purposes, or simply as ornamentation.\nFins first evolved on fish as a means of locomotion. Fish fins are used to generate thrust and control the subsequent motion. Fish and other aquatic animals, such as cetaceans, actively propel and steer themselves with pectoral and tail fins. As they swim, they use other fins, such as dorsal and anal fins, to achieve stability and refine their maneuvering.\nThe fins on the tails of cetaceans, ichthyosaurs, metriorhynchids, mosasaurs and plesiosaurs are called flukes.\nThrust generation.\nFoil shaped fins generate thrust when moved, the lift of the fin sets water or air in motion and pushes the fin in the opposite direction. Aquatic animals get significant thrust by moving fins back and forth in water. Often the tail fin is used, but some aquatic animals generate thrust from pectoral fins. Fins can also generate thrust if they are rotated in air or water. Turbines and propellers (and sometimes fans and pumps) use a number of rotating fins, also called foils, wings, arms or blades. Propellers use the fins to translate torquing force to lateral thrust, thus propelling an aircraft or ship. Turbines work in reverse, using the lift of the blades to generate torque and power from moving gases or water.\nCavitation can be a problem with high power applications, resulting in damage to propellers or turbines, as well as noise and loss of power. Cavitation occurs when negative pressure causes bubbles (cavities) to form in a liquid, which then promptly and violently collapse. It can cause significant damage and wear. Cavitation damage can also occur to the tail fins of powerful swimming marine animals, such as dolphins and tuna. Cavitation is more likely to occur near the surface of the ocean, where the ambient water pressure is relatively low. Even if they have the power to swim faster, dolphins may have to restrict their speed because collapsing cavitation bubbles on their tail are too painful. Cavitation also slows tuna, but for a different reason. Unlike dolphins, these fish do not feel the bubbles, because they have bony fins without nerve endings. Nevertheless, they cannot swim faster because the cavitation bubbles create a vapor film around their fins that limits their speed. Lesions have been found on tuna that are consistent with cavitation damage.\nScombrid fishes (tuna, mackerel and bonito) are particularly high-performance swimmers. Along the margin at the rear of their bodies is a line of small rayless, non-retractable fins, known as finlets. There has been much speculation about the function of these finlets. Research done in 2000 and 2001 by Nauen and Lauder indicated that \"the finlets have a hydrodynamic effect on local flow during steady swimming\" and that \"the most posterior finlet is oriented to redirect flow into the developing tail vortex, which may increase thrust produced by the tail of swimming mackerel\".\nFish use multiple fins, so it is possible that a given fin can have a hydrodynamic interaction with another fin. In particular, the fins immediately upstream of the caudal (tail) fin may be proximate fins that can directly affect the flow dynamics at the caudal fin. In 2011, researchers using volumetric imaging techniques were able to generate \"the first instantaneous three-dimensional views of wake structures as they are produced by freely swimming fishes\". They found that \"continuous tail beats resulted in the formation of a linked chain of vortex rings\" and that \"the dorsal and anal fin wakes are rapidly entrained by the caudal fin wake, approximately within the timeframe of a subsequent tail beat\".\nMotion control.\nOnce motion has been established, the motion itself can be controlled with the use of other fins. Boats control direction (yaw) with fin-like rudders, and roll with stabilizer and keel fins. Airplanes achieve similar results with small specialised fins that change the shape of their wings and tail fins.\nStabilising fins are used as fletching on arrows and some darts, and at the rear of some bombs, missiles, rockets and self-propelled torpedoes. These are typically planar and shaped like small wings, although grid fins are sometimes used. Static fins have also been used for one satellite, GOCE.\nTemperature regulation.\nEngineering fins are also used as heat transfer fins to regulate temperature in heat sinks or fin radiators.\nOrnamentation and other uses.\nIn biology, fins can have an adaptive significance as sexual ornaments. During courtship, the female cichlid, \"Pelvicachromis taeniatus\", displays a large and visually arresting purple pelvic fin. \"The researchers found that males clearly preferred females with a larger pelvic fin and that pelvic fins grew in a more disproportionate way than other fins on female fish.\"\nReshaping human feet with swim fins, rather like the tail fin of a fish, add thrust and efficiency to the kicks of a swimmer or underwater diver Surfboard fins provide surfers with means to maneuver and control their boards. Contemporary surfboards often have a centre fin and two cambered side fins.\nThe bodies of reef fishes are often shaped differently from open water fishes. Open water fishes are usually built for speed, streamlined like torpedoes to minimise friction as they move through the water. Reef fish operate in the relatively confined spaces and complex underwater landscapes of coral reefs. For this manoeuvrability is more important than straight line speed, so coral reef fish have developed bodies which optimize their ability to dart and change direction. They outwit predators by dodging into fissures in the reef or playing hide and seek around coral heads.\nThe pectoral and pelvic fins of many reef fish, such as butterflyfish, damselfish and angelfish, have evolved so they can act as brakes and allow complex maneuvers. Many reef fish, such as butterflyfish, damselfish and angelfish, have evolved bodies which are deep and laterally compressed like a pancake, and will fit into fissures in rocks. Their pelvic and pectoral fins are designed differently, so they act together with the flattened body to optimise maneuverability. Some fishes, such as puffer fish, filefish and trunkfish, rely on pectoral fins for swimming and hardly use tail fins at all.\nEvolution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Aristotle recognised the distinction between analogous and homologous structures, and made the following prophetic comparison:\n\"Birds in a way resemble fishes. For birds have their wings in the upper part of their bodies and fishes have two fins in the front part of their bodies. Birds have feet on their underpart and most fishes have a second pair of fins in their under-part and near their front fins.\"\n \u2013 Aristotle, \"De incessu animalium\" \nThere is an old theory, proposed by anatomist Carl Gegenbaur, which has been often disregarded in science textbooks, \"that fins and (later) limbs evolved from the gills of an extinct vertebrate\". Gaps in the fossil record had not allowed a definitive conclusion. In 2009, researchers from the University of Chicago found evidence that the \"genetic architecture of gills, fins and limbs is the same\", and that \"the skeleton of any appendage off the body of an animal is probably patterned by the developmental genetic program that we have traced back to formation of gills in sharks\". Recent studies support the idea that gill arches and paired fins are serially homologous and thus that fins may have evolved from gill tissues.\nFish are the ancestors of all mammals, reptiles, birds and amphibians. In particular, terrestrial tetrapods (four-legged animals) evolved from fish and made their first forays onto land 400 million years ago. They used paired pectoral and pelvic fins for locomotion. The pectoral fins developed into forelegs (arms in the case of humans) and the pelvic fins developed into hind legs. Much of the genetic machinery that builds a walking limb in a tetrapod is already present in the swimming fin of a fish.\nIn 2011, researchers at Monash University in Australia used primitive but still living lungfish \"to trace the evolution of pelvic fin muscles to find out how the load-bearing hind limbs of the tetrapods evolved.\" Further research at the University of Chicago found bottom-walking lungfishes had already evolved characteristics of the walking gaits of terrestrial tetrapods.\nIn a classic example of convergent evolution, the pectoral limbs of pterosaurs, birds and bats further evolved along independent paths into flying wings. Even with flying wings there are many similarities with walking legs, and core aspects of the genetic blueprint of the pectoral fin have been retained.\nAbout 200 million years ago the first mammals appeared. A group of these mammals started returning to the sea about 52 million years ago, thus completing a circle. These are the cetaceans (whales, dolphins and porpoises). Recent DNA analysis suggests that cetaceans evolved from within the even-toed ungulates, and that they share a common ancestor with the hippopotamus. About 23 million years ago another group of bearlike land mammals started returning to the sea. These were the pinnipeds (seals). What had become walking limbs in cetaceans and seals evolved further, independently in a reverse form of convergent evolution, back to new forms of swimming fins. The forelimbs became flippers and, in pinnipeds, the hind limbs became a tail terminating in two fins (the cetacean fluke, conversely, is an entirely new organ). Fish tails are usually vertical and move from side to side. Cetacean flukes are horizontal and move up and down, because cetacean spines bend the same way as in other mammals.\nIchthyosaurs are ancient reptiles that resembled dolphins. They first appeared about 245 million years ago and disappeared about 90 million years ago.\n\"This sea-going reptile with terrestrial ancestors converged so strongly on fishes that it actually evolved a dorsal fin and tail in just the right place and with just the right hydrological design. These structures are all the more remarkable because they evolved from nothing \u2014 the ancestral terrestrial reptile had no hump on its back or blade on its tail to serve as a precursor.\"\nThe biologist Stephen Jay Gould said the ichthyosaur was his favorite example of convergent evolution.\nRobotics.\nThe use of fins for the propulsion of aquatic animals can be remarkably effective. It has been calculated that some fish can achieve a propulsive efficiency greater than 90%. Fish can accelerate and maneuver much more effectively than boats or submarine, and produce less water disturbance and noise. This has led to biomimetic studies of underwater robots which attempt to emulate the locomotion of aquatic animals. An example is the Robot Tuna built by the http://, to analyze and mathematically model thunniform motion. In 2005, the Sea Life London Aquarium displayed three robotic fish created by the computer science department at the University of Essex. The fish were designed to be autonomous, swimming around and avoiding obstacles like real fish. Their creator claimed that he was trying to combine \"the speed of tuna, acceleration of a pike, and the navigating skills of an eel\".\nThe \"AquaPenguin\", developed by Festo of Germany, copies the streamlined shape and propulsion by front flippers of penguins. Festo also developed \"AquaRay\", \"AquaJelly\" and \"AiraCuda\", respectively emulating the locomotion of manta rays, jellyfish and barracuda.\nIn 2004, Hugh Herr at MIT prototyped a biomechatronic robotic fish with a living actuator by surgically transplanting muscles from frog legs to the robot and then making the robot swim by pulsing the muscle fibers with electricity.\nRobotic fish offer some research advantages, such as the ability to examine part of a fish design in isolation from the rest, and variance of a single parameter, such as flexibility or direction. Researchers can directly measure forces more easily than in live fish. \"Robotic devices also facilitate three-dimensional kinematic studies and correlated hydrodynamic analyses, as the location of the locomotor surface can be known accurately. And, individual components of a natural motion (such as outstroke vs. instroke of a flapping appendage) can be programmed separately, which is certainly difficult to achieve when working with a live animal.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11037", "revid": "5241433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11037", "title": "Freyr", "text": "Norse deity\nIn Norse mythology, Freyr (Old Norse: \"(the) Lord\") is the god associated with kingship, fertility, peace, prosperity, fair weather, and good harvest. Freyr, sometimes referred to as Yngvi-Freyr, was especially associated with Sweden and seen as an ancestor of the Swedish royal house. According to Adam of Bremen, Freyr was associated with peace and pleasure, and was represented with a phallic statue in the Temple at Uppsala. According to Snorri Sturluson, Freyr was \"the most renowned of the \u00e6sir\", and was venerated for good harvest and peace.\nIn the mythological stories in the Icelandic books the \"Poetic Edda\" and the \"Prose Edda\", Freyr is presented as one of the Vanir, the son of the god Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r and his sister-wife, as well as the twin brother of the goddess Freyja. The gods gave him \u00c1lfheimr, the realm of the Elves, as a teething present. He rides the shining dwarf-made boar Gullinbursti, and possesses the ship Sk\u00ed\u00f0bla\u00f0nir, which always has a favorable breeze and can be folded together and carried in a pouch when it is not being used. Freyr is also known to have been associated with the horse cult. He also kept sacred horses in his sanctuary at Trondheim in Norway. He has the servants Sk\u00edrnir, Byggvir and Beyla.\nThe most extensive surviving Freyr myth relates Freyr's falling in love with the female j\u00f6tunn Ger\u00f0r. Eventually, she becomes his wife but first Freyr has to give away his sword, which fights on its own \"if wise be he who wields it.\" Although deprived of this weapon, Freyr defeats the j\u00f6tunn Beli with an antler. However, lacking his sword, Freyr will be killed by the fire j\u00f6tunn Surtr during the events of Ragnar\u00f6k.\nLike other Germanic deities, veneration of Freyr was revived during the modern period through the Heathenry movement.\nName.\nThe Old Norse name \"Freyr\" ('lord') is generally thought to descend from a Proto-Norse form reconstructed as , stemming from the Proto-Germanic noun \"*frawjaz\" ~ *\"fraw(j)\u014dn\" ('lord'), and cognate with Gothic , Old English , or Old High German , all meaning 'lord, master'. The runic form , derived from an earlier , may also be related. Recently, however, an etymology deriving the name of the god from a nominalized form of the Proto-Scandinavian adjective *\"fraiw(i)a\"- ('fruitful, generative') has also been proposed. According to linguist Guus Kroonen, \"within Germanic, the attestation of ON \"frjar\", \"frj\u00f3r\", \"fr\u00e6r\", Icel. \"frj\u00f3r\" 'fertile; prolific' &lt; *\"fraiwa\"- clearly seems to point to a stem *\"frai(w)\"- meaning 'fecund'. Both in form and meaning, \"fraiwa\"- ('seed') is reminiscent of \"Freyr\" 'fertility deity' &lt; *\"frauja\"-. The possibility must be considered, therefore, that *\"fraiwa\"- was metathesized from *\"frawja\"-, a collective of some kind.\" Freyr is also known by a series of other names which describe his attributes and role in religious practice and associated mythology.\nAdam of Bremen.\nWritten c. 1080, one of the oldest written sources on pre-Christian Scandinavian religious practices is Adam of Bremen's . Adam claimed to have access to first-hand accounts on pagan practices in Sweden. He refers to Freyr with the Latinized name Fricco and mentions that an image of him at Skara was destroyed by the Christian missionary Bishop Egino. Adam's description of the Temple at Uppsala gives some details on the god.\nLater in the account Adam states that when a marriage is performed a libation is made to the image of Fricco.\nHistorians are divided on the reliability of Adam's account.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nWhen Snorri Sturluson was writing in 13th century Iceland, the indigenous Germanic gods were still remembered although they had not been openly worshiped for more than two centuries.\n\"Gylfaginning\".\nIn the \"Gylfaginning\" section of his \"Prose Edda\", Snorri introduces Freyr as one of the major gods.\nThis description has similarities to the older account by Adam of Bremen but the differences are interesting. Adam assigns control of the weather and produce of the fields to Thor but Snorri says that Freyr rules over those areas. Snorri also omits any explicitly sexual references in Freyr's description. Those discrepancies can be explained in several ways. Adam and Snorri were writing with different goals in mind. It is possible that the Norse gods did not have exactly the same roles in Icelandic and Swedish paganism. Either Snorri or Adam may also have had distorted information.\nThe only extended myth related to Freyr in the \"Prose Edda\" is the story of his marriage.\nThe woman is Ger\u00f0r, a beautiful giantess. Freyr immediately falls in love with her and becomes depressed and taciturn. After a period of brooding, he consents to talk to Sk\u00edrnir, his foot-page. He tells Sk\u00edrnir that he has fallen in love with a beautiful woman and thinks he will die if he cannot have her. He asks Sk\u00edrnir to go and woo her for him.\nThe loss of Freyr's sword has consequences. According to the \"Prose Edda\", Freyr had to fight Beli without his sword, and slew him with an antler. But the result at Ragnar\u00f6k, the end of the world, will be much more serious. Freyr is fated to fight the fire-giant Surtr, and since he does not have his sword he will be defeated.\nEven after the loss of his weapon Freyr still has two magical artifacts, both dwarf-made. One is the ship Sk\u00ed\u00f0bla\u00f0nir, which will have favoring breeze wherever its owner wants to go and can also be folded together like a napkin and carried in a pouch. The other is the boar Gullinbursti whose mane glows to illuminate the way for his owner. No myths involving Sk\u00ed\u00f0bla\u00f0nir have come down to us but Snorri relates that Freyr rode to Baldr's funeral in a wagon pulled by Gullinbursti.\nSkaldic poetry.\nFreyr is referred to several times in skaldic poetry. In \"H\u00fasdr\u00e1pa\", partially preserved in the Prose Edda, he is said to ride a boar to Baldr's funeral.\nIn a poem by Egill Skalla-Gr\u00edmsson, Freyr is called upon along with Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r to drive Eric Bloodaxe from Norway. The same skald mentions in \"Arinbjarnarkvi\u00f0a\" that his friend has been blessed by the two gods.\n\"Nafna\u00feulur\".\nIn \"Nafna\u00feulur\" Freyr is said to ride the horse Bl\u00f3\u00f0ugh\u00f3fi (\"Bloody Hoof\").\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nFreyr is mentioned in several of the poems in the \"Poetic Edda\". The information there is largely consistent with that of the \"Prose Edda\" while each collection has some details not found in the other.\n\"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\".\n\"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", the best known of the Eddic poems, describes the final confrontation between Freyr and Surtr during Ragnar\u00f6k.\nSome scholars have preferred a slightly different translation, in which the sun shines \"from the sword of the gods\". The idea is that the sword which Surtr slays Freyr with is the \"sword of the gods\" which Freyr had earlier bargained away for Ger\u00f0r. This would add a further layer of tragedy to the myth. Sigur\u00f0ur Nordal argued for this view but the possibility represented by Ursula Dronke's translation above is equally possible.\n\"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\".\n\"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", a poem which largely consists of miscellaneous information about the gods, mentions Freyr's abode.\nA tooth-gift was a gift given to an infant on the cutting of the first tooth. Since \"Alfheimr\" or \"\u00c1lfheimr\" means \"World of \u00c1lfar (Elves)\" the fact that Freyr should own it is one of the indications of a connection between the Vanir and the obscure \u00c1lfar. \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" also mentions that the sons of \u00cdvaldi made Sk\u00ed\u00f0bla\u00f0nir for Freyr and that it is the best of ships.\n\"Lokasenna\".\nIn the poem \"Lokasenna\", Loki accuses the gods of various misdeeds. He criticizes the Vanir for incest, saying that Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r had Freyr with his sister. He also states that the gods discovered Freyr and Freyja having sex together. The god T\u00fdr speaks up in Freyr's defense.\n\"Lokasenna\" also mentions that Freyr has servants called Byggvir and Beyla. They seem to have been associated with the making of bread.\n\"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\".\nThe courtship of Freyr and Ger\u00f0r is dealt with extensively in the poem \"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\".\nFreyr is depressed after seeing Ger\u00f0r. Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r and Ska\u00f0i ask Sk\u00edrnir to go and talk with him. Freyr reveals the cause of his grief and asks Sk\u00edrnir to go to J\u00f6tunheimr to woo Ger\u00f0r for him. Freyr gives Sk\u00edrnir a steed and his magical sword for the journey.\nWhen Sk\u00edrnir finds Ger\u00f0r he starts by offering her treasures if she will marry Freyr. When she declines he forces her to accept by threatening her with destructive magic.\n\"Ynglinga saga\".\nSnorri Sturluson starts his epic history of the kings of Norway with \"Ynglinga saga\", a euhemerized account of the Norse gods. Here Odin and the \u00c6sir are men from Asia who gain power through their prowess in war and Odin's skills. But when Odin attacks the Vanir he bites off more than he can chew and peace is negotiated after the destructive and indecisive \u00c6sir-Vanir War. Hostages are exchanged to seal the peace deal and the Vanir send Freyr and Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r to live with the \u00c6sir. At this point the saga, like \"Lokasenna\", mentions that incest was practised among the Vanir.\nOdin makes Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r and Freyr priests of sacrifices and they become influential leaders. Odin goes on to conquer the North and settles in Sweden where he rules as king, collects taxes and maintains sacrifices. After Odin's death, Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r takes the throne. During his rule there is peace and good harvest and the Swedes come to believe that Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r controls these things. Eventually Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r falls ill and dies.\nFreyr had a son named Fj\u00f6lnir, who succeeds him as king and rules during the continuing period of peace and good seasons. Fj\u00f6lnir's descendants are enumerated in \"Ynglingatal\" which describes the mythological kings of Sweden.\n\"\u00d6gmundar \u00fe\u00e1ttr dytts\".\nThe 14th century Icelandic \"\u00d6gmundar \u00fe\u00e1ttr dytts\" contains a tradition of how Freyr was transported in a wagon and administered by a priestess, in Sweden. Freyr's role as a fertility god needed a female counterpart in a divine couple (McKinnell's translation 1987):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Great heathen sacrifices were held there at that time, and for a long while Frey had been the god who was worshipped most there \u2013 and so much power had been gained by Frey's statue that the devil used to speak to people out of the mouth of the idol, and a young and beautiful woman had been obtained to serve Frey. It was the faith of the local people that Frey was alive, as seemed to some extent to be the case, and they thought he would need to have a sexual relationship with his wife; along with Frey she was to have complete control over the temple settlement and all that belonged to it.\nIn this short story, a man named Gunnar was suspected of manslaughter and escaped to Sweden, where Gunnar became acquainted with this young priestess. He helped her drive Freyr's wagon with the god effigy in it, but the god did not appreciate Gunnar and so attacked him and would have killed Gunnar if he had not promised himself to return to the Christian faith if he would make it back to Norway. When Gunnar had promised this, a demon jumped out of the god effigy and so Freyr was nothing but a piece of wood. Gunnar destroyed the wooden idol and dressed himself as Freyr, then Gunnar and the priestess travelled across Sweden where people were happy to see the god visiting them. After a while he made the priestess pregnant, but this was seen by the Swedes as confirmation that Freyr was truly a fertility god and not a scam. Finally, Gunnar had to flee back to Norway with his young bride and had her baptized at the court of Olaf Tryggvason.\nOther Icelandic sources.\nWorship of Freyr is alluded to in several Icelanders' sagas.\nThe protagonist of \"Hrafnkels saga\" is a priest of Freyr. He dedicates a horse to the god and kills a man for riding it, setting in motion a chain of fateful events.\nIn \"G\u00edsla saga\" a chieftain named \"\u00deorgr\u00edmr Freysgo\u00f0i\" is an ardent worshipper of Freyr. When he dies he is buried in a howe.\n\"Hallfre\u00f0ar saga\", \"V\u00edga-Gl\u00fams saga\" and \"Vatnsd\u0153la saga\" also mention Freyr.\nOther Icelandic sources referring to Freyr include \"\u00cdslendingab\u00f3k\", , and \"Hervarar saga\".\n\"\u00cdslendingab\u00f3k\", written c. 1125, is the oldest Icelandic source that mentions Freyr, including him in a genealogy of Swedish kings. includes a heathen oath to be sworn at an assembly where Freyr, Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r, and \"the almighty \"\u00e1ss\"\" are invoked. \"Hervarar saga\" mentions a Yuletide sacrifice of a boar to Freyr.\n\"Gesta Danorum\".\nThe 12th Century Danish \"Gesta Danorum\" describes Freyr, under the name Fr\u00f8, as the \"viceroy of the gods\".\nThat Freyr had a cult at Uppsala is well confirmed from other sources. The reference to the change in sacrificial ritual may also reflect some historical memory. There is archaeological evidence for an increase in human sacrifices in the late Viking Age though among the Norse gods human sacrifice is most often linked to Odin. Another reference to Fr\u00f8 and sacrifices is found earlier in the work, where the beginning of an annual \"bl\u00f3t\" to him is related. King Hadingus is cursed after killing a divine being and atones for his crime with a sacrifice.\nThe sacrifice of dark-coloured victims to Freyr has a parallel in Ancient Greek religion where the chthonic fertility deities preferred dark-coloured victims to lighter ones.\nIn book 9, Saxo identifies Fr\u00f8 as the \"king of Sweden\" (\"rex Suetiae\"):\nThe reference to public prostitution may be a memory of fertility cult practices. Such a memory may also be the source of a description in book 6 of the stay of Starcatherus, a follower of Odin, in Sweden.\nYngvi.\nA strophe of the Anglo-Saxon rune poem (c. 1100) records that:\n\"Ing was first among the East Danes seen by men\"\nThis may refer to the origins of the worship of Ingui in the tribal areas that Tacitus mentions in his \"Germania\" as being populated by the Inguieonnic tribes. A later Danish chronicler lists Ingui was one of three brothers that the Danish tribes descended from. The strophe also states that \"then he (Ingui) went back over the waves, his wagon behind him\" which could connect Ingui to earlier conceptions of the wagon processions of Nerthus and the later Scandinavian conceptions of Freyr's wagon journeys.\nIngui is mentioned also in some later Anglo-Saxon literature under varying forms of his name, such as \"For what doth Ingeld have to do with Christ\" and the variants used in Beowulf to designate the kings as 'leader of the friends of Ing'. The compound Ingui-Frea (OE) and Yngvi-Freyr (ON) likely refer to the connection between the god and the Germanic kings' role as priests during the sacrifices in the pagan period, as \"Frea\" and \"Freyr\" are titles meaning 'Lord'.\nThe Swedish royal dynasty was known as the Ynglings from their descent from Yngvi-Freyr. This is supported by Tacitus, who wrote about the Germans: \"In their ancient songs, their only way of remembering or recording the past they celebrate an earth-born god Tuisco, and his son Mannus, as the origin of their race, as their founders. To Mannus they assign three sons, from whose names, they say, the coast tribes are called Ingaevones; those of the interior, Herminones; all the rest, Istaevones\".\nArchaeological record.\nR\u00e4llinge statuette.\nIn 1904, a Viking Age statuette identified as a depiction of Freyr was discovered on the farm R\u00e4llinge in Lunda, S\u00f6dermanland parish in the province of S\u00f6dermanland, Sweden. The depiction features a cross-legged seated, bearded male with an erect penis. He is wearing a pointed cap or helmet and stroking his triangular beard. The seven-centimeter-tall statue is displayed at the Swedish Museum of National Antiquities.\nSkog tapestry.\nA part of the Swedish Skog tapestry depicts three figures that have been interpreted as allusions to Odin, Thor, and Freyr, but also as the three Scandinavian holy kings Canute, Eric and Olaf. The figures coincide with 11th century descriptions of statue arrangements recorded by Adam of Bremen at the Temple at Uppsala and written accounts of the gods during the late Viking Age. The tapestry is originally from H\u00e4lsingland, Sweden but is now housed at the Swedish Museum of National Antiquities.\nGullgubber.\nSmall pieces of gold foil featuring engravings dating from the Migration Period into the early Viking Age (known as \"gullgubber\") have been discovered in various locations in Scandinavia, at one site almost 2,500. The foil pieces have been found largely on the sites of buildings, only rarely in graves. The figures are sometimes single, occasionally an animal, sometimes a man and a woman with a leafy bough between them, facing or embracing one another. The human figures are almost always clothed and are sometimes depicted with their knees bent. Scholar Hilda Ellis Davidson says that it has been suggested that the figures are taking part in a dance, and that they may have been connected with weddings, as well as linked to the Vanir group of gods, representing the notion of a divine marriage, such as in the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\"; the coming together of Ger\u00f0r and Freyr.\nModern influence.\nFreyr appears in numerous works of modern art and literature. He appears, for example, alongside numerous other figures from Norse mythology in the Danish poet Adam Gottlob Oehlenschl\u00e4ger's \"Nordens Guder\" (1819). He also appears in Icelandic poet Ger\u00f0ur Kristn\u00fd's \"Bl\u00f3\u00f0h\u00f3fnir\" (2010), a feminist retelling of the Eddic poem \"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\" that won the 2010 Icelandic Literature Award.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11038", "revid": "3174456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11038", "title": "Freyja", "text": "Norse goddess\nIn Norse mythology, Freyja (Old Norse \"(the) Lady\") is a goddess associated with love, beauty, fertility, sex, war, gold, and sei\u00f0r (magic for seeing and influencing the future). Freyja is the owner of the necklace Br\u00edsingamen, rides a chariot pulled by two cats, is accompanied by the boar Hildisv\u00edni, and possesses a cloak of falcon feathers to allow her to shift into falcon \"hamr\". By her husband \u00d3\u00f0r, she is the mother of two daughters, Hnoss and Gersemi. Along with her twin brother Freyr, her father Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r, and her mother (Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r's sister, unnamed in sources), she is a member of the Vanir. Stemming from Old Norse \"Freyja\", modern forms of the name include Freya, Freyia, and Freja.\nFreyja rules over her heavenly field, F\u00f3lkvangr, where she receives half of those who die in battle. The other half go to the god Odin's hall, Valhalla. Within F\u00f3lkvangr lies her hall, Sessr\u00famnir. Freyja assists other deities by allowing them to use her feathered cloak, is invoked in matters of fertility and love, and is frequently sought after by powerful j\u00f6tnar who wish to make her their wife. Freyja's husband, the god \u00d3\u00f0r, is frequently absent. She cries tears of red gold for him, and searches for him under assumed names. Freyja has numerous names, including \"Gefn\", \"H\u00f6rn\", \"Mard\u00f6ll\", \"S\u00fdr\", \"Vanad\u00eds\", and \"Valfreyja\".\nFreyja is attested in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources; in the \"Prose Edda\" and \"Heimskringla\", composed by Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century; in several Sagas of Icelanders; in the short story \"\"S\u00f6rla \u00fe\u00e1ttr\"\"; in the poetry of skalds; and into the modern age in Scandinavian folklore.\nScholars have debated whether Freyja and the goddess Frigg ultimately stem from a single goddess common among the Germanic peoples. They have connected her to the valkyries, female battlefield choosers of the slain, and analyzed her relation to other goddesses and figures in Germanic mythology, including the thrice-burnt and thrice-reborn Gullveig/Hei\u00f0r, the goddesses Gefjon, Ska\u00f0i, \u00deorger\u00f0r H\u00f6lgabr\u00fa\u00f0r and Irpa, Mengl\u00f6\u00f0, and the 1st century CE \"Isis\" of the Suebi. In Scandinavia, Freyja's name frequently appears in the names of plants, especially in southern Sweden. Various plants in Scandinavia once bore her name, but it was replaced with the name of the Virgin Mary during the process of Christianization. Rural Scandinavians continued to acknowledge Freyja as a supernatural figure into the 19th century, and Freyja has inspired various works of art.\nName.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Freyja\" transparently means 'lady, mistress' in Old Norse. Stemming from the Proto-Germanic feminine noun *\"frawj\u014dn\" ('lady, mistress'), it is cognate with Old Saxon \"fr\u016ba\" ('lady, mistress') or Old High German ('lady'; cf. modern German ). \"Freyja\" is also etymologically close to the name of the god \"Freyr\", meaning 'lord' in Old Norse. The theonym \"Freyja\" is thus considered to have been an epithet in origin, replacing a personal name that is now unattested.\nAlternative names.\nIn addition to \"Freyja\", Old Norse sources refer to the goddess by the following names:\nAttestations.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\", Freyja is mentioned or appears in the poems \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", \"Lokasenna\", \"\u00derymskvi\u00f0a\", \"Oddr\u00fanargr\u00e1tr\", and \"Hyndlulj\u00f3\u00f0\".\n\"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" contains a stanza that mentions Freyja, referring to her as \"\u00d3\u00f0's girl\"; Freyja being the wife of her husband, \u00d3\u00f0r. The stanza recounts that Freyja was once promised to an unnamed builder, later revealed to be a j\u00f6tunn and subsequently killed by Thor (recounted in detail in \"Gylfaginning\" chapter 42; see \"Prose Edda\" section below). In the poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", Odin (disguised as \"Gr\u00edmnir\") tells the young Agnar that every day Freyja allots seats to half of those that are slain in her hall F\u00f3lkvangr, while Odin owns the other half.\nIn the poem \"Lokasenna\", where Loki accuses nearly every female in attendance of promiscuity or unfaithfulness, an aggressive exchange occurs between Loki and Freyja. The introduction to the poem notes that among other gods and goddesses, Freyja attends a celebration held by \u00c6gir. In verse, after Loki has flyted with the goddess Frigg, Freyja interjects, telling Loki that he is insane for dredging up his terrible deeds, and that Frigg knows the fate of everyone, though she does not tell it. Loki tells her to be silent, and says that he knows all about her\u2014that Freyja is not lacking in blame, for each of the gods and elves in the hall have been her lover. Freyja objects. She says that Loki is lying, that he is just looking to blather about misdeeds, and since the gods and goddesses are furious at him, he can expect to go home defeated. Loki tells Freyja to be silent, calls her a malicious witch, and conjures a scenario where Freyja was once astride her brother when all of the gods, laughing, surprised the two. Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r interjects\u2014he says that a woman having a lover other than her husband is harmless, and he points out that Loki has borne children, and calls Loki a pervert. The poem continues in turn.\nThe poem \"\u00derymskvi\u00f0a\" features Loki borrowing Freyja's cloak of feathers and Thor dressing up as Freyja to fool the lusty j\u00f6tunn \u00derymr. In the poem, Thor wakes up to find that his powerful hammer, Mj\u00f6llnir, is missing. Thor tells Loki of his missing hammer, and the two go to the beautiful court of Freyja. Thor asks Freyja if she will lend him her cloak of feathers, so that he may try to find his hammer. Freyja agrees:\nLoki flies away in the whirring feather cloak, arriving in the land of J\u00f6tunheimr. He spies \u00derymr sitting on top of a mound. \u00derymr reveals that he has hidden Thor's hammer deep within the earth and that no one will ever know where the hammer is unless Freyja is brought to him as his wife. Loki flies back, the cloak whistling, and returns to the courts of the gods. Loki tells Thor of \u00derymr's conditions.\nThe two go to see the beautiful Freyja. The first thing that Thor says to Freyja is that she should dress herself and put on a bride's head-dress, for they shall drive to J\u00f6tunheimr. At that, Freyja is furious\u2014the halls of the gods shake, she snorts in anger, and from the goddess the necklace Br\u00edsingamen falls. Indignant, Freyja responds:\nThe gods and goddesses assemble at a thing and debate how to solve the problem. The god Heimdallr proposes to dress Thor up as a bride, complete with bridal dress, head-dress, jingling keys, jewelry, and the famous Br\u00edsingamen. Thor objects but is hushed by Loki, reminding him that the new owners of the hammer will soon be settling in the land of the gods if the hammer is not returned. Thor is dressed as planned and Loki is dressed as his maid. Thor and Loki go to J\u00f6tunheimr.\nIn the meantime, Thrym tells his servants to prepare for the arrival of the daughter of Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r. When \"Freyja\" arrives in the morning, Thrym is taken aback by her behavior; her immense appetite for food and mead is far more than what he expected, and when Thrym goes in for a kiss beneath \"Freyja's\" veil, he finds \"her\" eyes to be terrifying, and he jumps down the hall. The disguised Loki makes excuses for the bride's odd behavior, claiming that she simply has not eaten or slept for eight days. In the end, the disguises successfully fool the j\u00f6tnar and, upon sight of it, Thor regains his hammer by force.\nIn the poem \"Oddr\u00fanargr\u00e1tr\", Oddr\u00fan helps Borgny give birth to twins. In thanks, Borgny invokes v\u00e6ttir, Frigg, Freyja, and other unspecified deities.\nFreyja is a main character in the poem \"Hyndlulj\u00f3\u00f0\", where she assists her faithful servant \u00d3ttar in finding information about his ancestry so that he may claim his inheritance. In doing so, Freyja turns \u00d3ttar into her boar, Hildisv\u00edni, and, by means of flattery and threats of death by fire, Freyja successfully pries the information that \u00d3ttar needs from the j\u00f6tunn Hyndla. Freyja speaks throughout the poem, and at one point praises \u00d3ttar for constructing a h\u00f6rgr (an altar of stones) and frequently making bl\u00f3t (sacrifices) to her:\n\"Prose Edda\".\nFreyja appears in the \"Prose Edda\" books \"Gylfaginning\" and \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\". In chapter 24 of \"Gylfaginning\", the enthroned figure of High says that after the god Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r split with the goddess Ska\u00f0i, he had two beautiful and mighty children (no partner is mentioned); a son, Freyr, and a daughter, Freyja. Freyr is \"the most glorious\" of the gods, and Freyja \"the most glorious\" of the goddesses. Freyja has a dwelling in the heavens, F\u00f3lkvangr, and that whenever Freyja \"rides into battle she gets half the slain, and the other half to Odin [...]\". In support, High quotes the \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" stanza mentioned in the \"Poetic Edda\" section above.\nHigh adds that Freyja has a large, beautiful hall called Sessr\u00famnir, and that when Freyja travels she sits in a chariot and drives two cats, and that Freyja is \"the most approachable one for people to pray to, and from her name is derived the honorific title whereby noble ladies are called \"fruvor\" [noble ladies]\". High adds that Freyja has a particular fondness for love songs, and that \"it is good to pray to her concerning love affairs\".\nIn chapter 29, High recounts the names and features of various goddesses, including Freyja. Regarding Freyja, High says that, next to Frigg, Freyja is highest in rank among them and that she owns the necklace Br\u00edsingamen. Freyja is married to \u00d3\u00f0r, who goes on long travels, and the two have a very fair daughter by the name of Hnoss. While \u00d3\u00f0r is absent, Freyja stays behind and in her sorrow she weeps tears of red gold. High notes that Freyja has many names, and explains that this is because Freyja adopted them when looking for \u00d3\u00f0r and traveling \"among strange peoples\". These names include \"Gefn\", \"H\u00f6rn\", \"Mard\u00f6ll\", \"S\u00fdr\", and \"Vanad\u00eds\".\nFreyja plays a part in the events leading to the birth of Sleipnir, the eight-legged horse. In chapter 42, High recounts that, soon after the gods built the hall Valhalla, a builder (unnamed) came to them and offered to build for them in three seasons a fortification so solid that no j\u00f6tunn would be able to come in over from Midgard. In exchange, the builder wants Freyja for his bride, and the sun and the moon. After some debate the gods agree, but with added conditions. In time, just as he is about to complete his work, it is revealed that the builder is, in fact, himself a j\u00f6tunn, and he is killed by Thor. In the meantime, Loki, in the form of a mare, has been impregnated by the j\u00f6tunn's horse, Sva\u00f0ilfari, and so gives birth to Sleipnir. In support, High quotes the \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" stanza that mentions Freyja. In chapter 49, High recalls the funeral of Baldr and says that Freyja attended the funeral and there drove her cat-chariot, the final reference to the goddess in \"Gylfaginning\".\nAt the beginning of the book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", Freyja is mentioned among eight goddesses attending a banquet held for \u00c6gir. Chapter 56 details the abduction of the goddess I\u00f0unn by the j\u00f6tunn \u00dejazi in the form of an eagle. Terrified at the prospect of death and torture due to his involvement in the abduction of I\u00f0unn, Loki asks if he may use Freyja's \"falcon shape\" (\"hamr\") to fly north to J\u00f6tunheimr and retrieve the missing goddess. Freyja allows it, and using her \"falcon shape\" and a furious chase by eagle-\u00dejazi, Loki successfully returns her.\nIn chapter 6, a means of referring to Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r is provided that refers to Frejya (\"father of Freyr and Freyja\"). In chapter 7, a means of referring to Freyr is provided that refers to the goddess (\"brother of Freyja\"). In chapter 8, ways of referring to the god Heimdallr are provided, including \"Loki's enemy, recoverer of Freyja's necklace\", inferring a myth involving Heimdallr recovering Freyja's necklace from Loki.\nIn chapter 17, the j\u00f6tunn Hrungnir finds himself in Asgard, the realm of the gods, and becomes very drunk. Hrungnir boasts that he will move Valhalla to J\u00f6tunheimr, bury Asgard, and kill all of the gods\u2014with the exception of the goddesses Freyja and Sif, who he says he will take home with him. Freyja is the only one of them that dares to bring him more to drink. Hrungnir says that he will drink all of their ale. After a while, the gods grow bored of Hrungnir's antics and invoke the name of Thor. Thor immediately enters the hall, hammer raised. Thor is furious and demands to know who is responsible for letting a j\u00f6tunn in to Asgard, who guaranteed Hrungnir safety, and why Freyja \"should be serving him drink as if at the \u00c6sir's banquet\".\nIn chapter 18, verses from the 10th century skald's composition \"\u00de\u00f3rsdr\u00e1pa\" are quoted. A kenning used in the poem refers to Freyja. In chapter 20, poetic ways to refer to Freyja are provided; \"daughter of Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r\", \"sister of Freyr\", \"wife of \u00d3\u00f0r\", \"mother of Hnoss\", \"possessor of the fallen slain and of Sessrumnir and tom-cats\", possessor of Br\u00edsingamen, \"Van-deity\", Vanad\u00eds, and \"fair-tear deity\". In chapter 32, poetic ways to refer to gold are provided, including \"Freyja's weeping\" and \"rain or shower [...] from Freyja's eyes\".\nChapter 33 tells that once the gods journeyed to visit \u00c6gir, one of whom was Freyja. In chapter 49, a quote from a work by the skald Einarr Sk\u00falason employs the kenning \"\u00d3\u00f0r's bedfellow's eye-rain\", which refers to Freyja and means \"gold\".\nChapter 36 explains again that gold can be referring to as Freyja's weeping due to her red gold tears. In support, works by the skalds Sk\u00fali \u00de\u00f3rsteinsson and Einarr Sk\u00falason are cited that use \"Freyja's tears\" or \"Freyja's weepings\" to represent \"gold\". The chapter features additional quotes from poetry by Einarr Sk\u00falason that references the goddess and her child Hnoss. Freyja receives a final mention in the \"Prose Edda\" in chapter 75, where a list of goddesses is provided that includes Freyja.\n\"Heimskringla\".\nThe \"Heimskringla\" book \"Ynglinga saga\" provides a euhemerized account of the origin of the gods, including Freyja. In chapter 4, Freyja is introduced as a member of the Vanir, the sister of Freyr, and the daughter of Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r and his sister (whose name is not provided). After the \u00c6sir\u2013Vanir War ends in a stalemate, Odin appoints Freyr and Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r as priests over sacrifices. Freyja becomes the priestess of sacrificial offerings and it was she who introduced the practice of sei\u00f0r to the \u00c6sir, previously only practiced by the Vanir.\nIn chapter 10, Freyja's brother Freyr dies, and Freyja is the last survivor among the \u00c6sir and Vanir. Freyja keeps up the sacrifices and becomes famous. The saga explains that, due to Freyja's fame, all women of rank become known by her name\u2014\"fr\u00favor\" (\"ladies\"), a woman who is the mistress of her property is referred to as \"freyja\", and \"h\u00fasfreyja\" (\"lady of the house\") for a woman who owns an estate.\nThe chapter adds that not only was Freyja very clever, but that she and her husband \u00d3\u00f0r had two immensely beautiful daughters, Gersemi and Hnoss, \"who gave their names to our most precious possessions\".\nOther.\nFreyja is mentioned in the sagas \"Egils saga\", \"Nj\u00e1ls saga\", \"H\u00e1lfs saga ok H\u00e1lfsrekka\", and in \"S\u00f6rla \u00fe\u00e1ttr\".\nIn \"Egils saga\", when Egill Skallagr\u00edmsson refuses to eat, his daughter \u00deorger\u00f0r (here anglicized as \"Thorgerd\") says she will go without food and thus starve to death, and in doing so will meet the goddess Freyja:\nThorgerd replied in a loud voice, \"I have had no evening meal, nor will I do so until I join Freyja. I know no better course of action than my father's. I do not want to live after my father and brother are dead.\"\nIn the first chapter of the 14th century legendary saga \"H\u00e1lfs saga ok H\u00e1lfsrekka\", King Alrek has two wives, Geirhild and Signy, and cannot keep them both. He tells the two women that he would keep whichever of them that brews the better ale for him by the time he has returned home in the summer. The two compete and during the brewing process Signy prays to Freyja and Geirhild to H\u00f6tt (\"hood\"), a man she had met earlier (earlier in the saga revealed to be Odin in disguise). H\u00f6tt answers her prayer and spits on her yeast. Signy's brew wins the contest.\nIn \"S\u00f6rla \u00fe\u00e1ttr\", a short, late 14th century narrative from a later and extended version of the \"\u00d3l\u00e1fs saga Tryggvasonar\" found in the \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\" manuscript, a euhemerized account of the gods is provided. In the account, Freyja is described as having been a concubine of Odin, who bartered sex to four dwarfs for a golden necklace. In the work, the \u00c6sir once lived in a city called Asgard, located in a region called \"Asialand or Asiahome\". Odin was the king of the realm, and made Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r and Freyr temple priests. Freyja was the daughter of Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r, and was Odin's concubine. Odin deeply loved Freyja, and she was \"the fairest of woman of that day\". Freyja had a beautiful bower, and when the door was shut no one could enter without Freyja's permission.\nChapter 1 records that one day Freyja passed by an open stone where dwarfs lived. Four dwarfs were smithying a golden necklace, and it was nearly done. Looking at the necklace, the dwarfs thought Freyja to be most fair, and she the necklace. Freyja offered to buy the collar from them with silver and gold and other items of value. The dwarfs said that they had no lack of money, and that for the necklace the only thing she could offer them would be a night with each of them. \"Whether she liked it better or worse\", Freyja agreed to the conditions, and so spent a night with each of the four dwarfs. The conditions were fulfilled and the necklace was hers. Freyja went home to her bower as if nothing happened.\nAs related in chapter 2, Loki, under the service of Odin, found out about Freyja's actions and told Odin. Odin told Loki to get the necklace and bring it to him. Loki said that since no one could enter Freyja's bower against her will, this would not be an easy task, yet Odin told him not to come back until he had found a way to get the necklace. Howling, Loki turned away and went to Freyja's bower but found it locked, and that he could not enter. So Loki transformed himself into a fly, and after having trouble finding even the tiniest of entrances, he managed to find a tiny hole at the gable-top, yet even here he had to squeeze through to enter.\nHaving made his way into Freyja's chambers, Loki looked around to be sure that no one was awake, and found that Freyja was asleep. He landed on her bed and noticed that she was wearing the necklace, the clasp turned downward. Loki turned into a flea and jumped onto Freyja's cheek and there bit her. Freyja stirred, turning about, and then fell asleep again. Loki removed his flea's shape and undid her collar, opened the bower, and returned to Odin.\nThe next morning Freyja woke and saw that the doors to her bower were open, yet unbroken, and that her precious necklace was gone. Freyja had an idea of who was responsible. She got dressed and went to Odin. She told Odin of the malice he had allowed against her and of the theft of her necklace, and that he should give her back her jewelry.\nOdin said that, given how she obtained it, she would never get it back. That is, with one exception: she could have it back if she could make two kings, themselves ruling twenty kings each, battle one another, and cast a spell so that each time one of their numbers falls in battle, they will again spring up and fight again. And that this must go on eternally, unless a Christian man of a particular stature goes into the battle and smites them, only then will they stay dead. Freyja agreed.\nLater Scandinavian folklore.\nAlthough the Christianization of Scandinavia sought to demonize the native gods, belief and reverence in the gods, including Freyja, persisted throughout the modern period and melded into Scandinavian folklore. Britt-Mari N\u00e4sstr\u00f6m comments that Freyja became a particular target under Christianization:\nFreyja's erotic qualities became an easy target for the new religion, in which an asexual virgin was the ideal woman [...] Freyja is called \"a whore\" and \"a harlot\" by the holy men and missionaries, whereas many of her functions in the everyday lives of men and women, such as protecting the vegetation and supplying assistance in childbirth were transferred to the Virgin Mary.\nHowever, Freyja did not disappear. In Iceland, Freyja was called upon for assistance by way of Icelandic magical staves as late as the 18th century; and as late as the 19th century, Freyja is recorded as retaining elements of her role as a fertility goddess among rural Swedes.\nThe Old Norse poem \"\u00derymskvi\u00f0a\" (or its source) continued into Scandinavian folk song tradition, where it was euhemerized and otherwise transformed over time. In Iceland, the poem became known as \"\u00derylur\", whereas in Denmark the poem became \"Thor af Havsgaard\" and in Sweden it became \"Torvisan\" or \"Hammarh\u00e4mtningen\". A section of the Swedish \"Torvisan\", in which \"Freyja\" has been transformed into \"the fair\" (\"den v\u00e4na\") \"Frojenborg\", reads as follows:\nIn the province of Sm\u00e5land, Sweden, an account is recorded connecting Freyja with sheet lightning in this respect. Writer Johan Alfred G\u00f6th recalled a Sunday in 1880 where men were walking in fields and looking at nearly ripened rye, where M\u00e5ns in Karryd said: \"Now Freyja is out watching if the rye is ripe\". Along with this, G\u00f6th recalls another mention of Freyja in the countryside:\nWhen as a boy I was visiting the old Proud-Katrina, I was afraid of lightning like all boys in those days. When the sheet lightning flared at the night, Katrina said: \"Don't be afraid little child, it is only Freyja who is out making fire with steel and flintstone to see if the rye is ripe. She is kind to people and she is only doing it to be of service, she is not like Thor, he slays both people and livestock, when he is in the mood\" [...] I later heard several old folks talk of the same thing in the same way.\nIn V\u00e4rend, Sweden, Freyja could also arrive at Christmas night and she used to shake the apple trees for the sake of a good harvest and consequently people left some apples in the trees for her sake. However, it was dangerous to leave the plough outdoors, because if Freyja sat on it, it would no longer be of any use.\nMany Asatru practitioners today mostly honor Freyja as a goddess of fertility, abundance and beauty. A common rite for modern Freya worshippers is to bake foods that have some connection to love in one way or another, such as chocolate. Freyja is also called upon for protection, usually when it comes to a domestic violence situation.\nEponyms.\nSeveral plants were named after Freyja, such as \"Freyja's tears\" and \"Freyja's hair\" (\"Polygala vulgaris\"), but during the process of Christianization, the name of the goddess was replaced with that of the Virgin Mary. In the pre-Christian period, the Orion constellation was called either Frigg's distaff or Freyja's distaff (Swedish \"Frejerock\").\nPlace names in Norway and Sweden reflect devotion to the goddess, including the Norwegian place name Fr\u00f8ihov (originally *\"Freyjuhof\", literally \"Freyja's hof\") and Swedish place names such as Fr\u00f6vi (from *\"Freyjuv\u00e9\", literally \"Freyja's v\u00e9\"). In a survey of toponyms in Norway, M. Olsen tallies at least 20 to 30 location names compounded with \"Freyja\". Three of these place names appear to derive from *\"Freyjuhof\" ('Freyja's hof'), whereas the goddess's name is frequently otherwise compounded with words for 'meadow' (such as \"-\u00feveit\", -\"land\") and similar land formations. These toponyms are attested most commonly on the west coast though a high frequency is found in the southeast.\nPlace names containing \"Freyja\" are yet more numerous and varied in Sweden, where they are widely distributed. A particular concentration is recorded in Uppland, among which a number derive from the above-mentioned \"*Freyjuv\u00e9\" and also *\"Freyjulundr\" ('Freyja's sacred grove'), place names that indicate public worship of Freyja. A variety of place names (such as \"Fr\u00f8al\" and \"Fr\u00f6ale\") have been seen as containing an element cognate to Gothic \"alhs\" and Old English \"ealh\" (\"temple\"), although these place names may be otherwise interpreted. In addition, \"Frejya\" appears as a compound element with a variety of words for geographic features such as fields, meadows, lakes and natural objects such as rocks.\nThe Freyja name \"H\u00f6rn\" appears in the Swedish place names H\u00e4rnevi and J\u00e4rnevi, stemming from the reconstructed Old Norse place name \"*H\u00f6rnar-v\u00e9\" (meaning \"H\u00f6rn's v\u00e9\").\nArchaeological record and historic depictions.\nA priestess was buried c.\u20091000 with considerable splendour in Hagebyh\u00f6ga in \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland. In addition to being buried with her wand, she had received great riches which included horses, a wagon and an Arabian bronze pitcher. There was also a silver pendant, which represents a woman with a broad necklace around her neck. This kind of necklace was only worn by the most prominent women during the Iron Age and some have interpreted it as Freyja's necklace Br\u00edsingamen. The pendant may represent Freyja herself.\nA 7th-century phalara found in a \"warrior grave\" in what is now Eschwege in northwestern Germany features a female figure with two large braids flanked by two \"cat-like\" beings and holding a staff-like object. This figure has been interpreted as Freyja. This image may be connected to various B-type bracteates, referred to as the F\u00fcrstenberg-type, that may also depict the goddess; they \"show a female figure, in a short skirt and double-looped hair, holding a stave or sceptre in her right hand and a double-cross feature in the left\".\nUpon its discovery, the 10th century Oseberg ship burial was found to contain a ceremonial wagon. One side of the ornate wagon features a depiction of nine cats. Scholars have linked this depiction to Freyja's cat-led chariot and a broader associations between the Vanir and wagons.\nA 12th century depiction of a cloaked but otherwise nude woman riding a large cat appears on a wall in the Schleswig Cathedral in Schleswig-Holstein, Northern Germany. Beside her is similarly a cloaked yet otherwise nude woman riding a distaff. Due to iconographic similarities to the literary record, these figures have been theorized as depictions of Freyja and Frigg respectively.\nTheories.\nRelation to Frigg and other goddesses and figures.\nDue to numerous similarities, scholars have frequently connected Freyja with the goddess Frigg. The connection with Frigg and question of possible earlier identification of Freyja with Frigg in the Proto-Germanic period (Frigg and Freyja common origin hypothesis) remains a matter of scholarly discourse. Regarding a Freyja-Frigg common origin hypothesis, scholar Stephan Grundy comments, \"the problem of whether Frigg or Freyja may have been a single goddess originally is a difficult one, made more so by the scantiness of pre-Viking Age references to Germanic goddesses, and the diverse quality of the sources. The best that can be done is to survey the arguments for and against their identity, and to see how well each can be supported.\"\nLike the name of the group of gods to which Freyja belongs, the Vanir, the name \"Freyja\" is not attested outside of Scandinavia, as opposed to the name of the goddess \"Frigg\", who is attested as a goddess common among the Germanic peoples, and whose name is reconstructed as Proto-Germanic *\"Frijj\u014d\". Similar proof for the existence of a common Germanic goddess from which \"Freyja\" descends does not exist, but scholars have commented that this may simply be due to lack of evidence.\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", a figure by the name of Gullveig is burnt three times yet is three times reborn. After her third rebirth, she is known as Hei\u00f0r. This event is generally accepted as precipitating the \u00c6sir\u2013Vanir War. Starting with scholar Gabriel Turville-Petre, scholars such as Rudolf Simek, Andy Orchard, and John Lindow have theorized that Gullveig/Hei\u00f0r is the same figure as Freyja, and that her involvement with the \u00c6sir somehow led to the events of the \u00c6sir\u2013Vanir War.\nOutside of theories connecting Freyja with the goddess Frigg, some scholars, such as Hilda Ellis Davidson and Britt-Mari N\u00e4sstr\u00f6m, have theorized that other goddesses in Norse mythology, such as Gefjon, Ger\u00f0r, and Ska\u00f0i, may be forms of Freyja in different roles or ages.\nReceiver of the slain.\nFreyja and her afterlife field F\u00f3lkvangr, where she receives half of the slain, have been theorized as connected to the valkyries. Scholar Britt-Mari N\u00e4sstr\u00f6m points out the description in \"Gylfaginning\" where it is said of Freyja that \"whenever she rides into battle she takes half of the slain\", and interprets \"F\u00f3lkvangr\" as \"the field of the Warriors\". N\u00e4sstr\u00f6m notes that, just like Odin, Freyja receives slain heroes who have died on the battlefield, and that her house is Sessrumnir (which she translates as \"filled with many seats\"), a dwelling that N\u00e4sstr\u00f6m posits likely fills the same function as Valhalla. N\u00e4sstr\u00f6m comments that \"still, we must ask why there are two heroic paradises in the Old Norse view of afterlife. It might possibly be a consequence of different forms of initiation of warriors, where one part seemed to have belonged to \u00d3\u00f0inn and the other to Freyja. These examples indicate that Freyja was a war-goddess, and she even appears as a valkyrie, literally 'the one who chooses the slain'.\"\nSiegfried Andres Dobat comments that \"in her mythological role as the chooser of half the fallen warriors for her death realm F\u00f3lkvangr, the goddess Freyja, however, emerges as the mythological role model for the Valkyrjar [\"sic\"] and the d\u00edsir.\"\nThe Oriental hypothesis.\nGustav Neckel, writing in 1920, connects Freyja to the Phrygian goddess Cybele. According to Neckel, both goddesses can be interpreted as \"fertility goddesses\" and other potential resemblances have been noted. Some scholars have suggested that the image of Cybele subsequently influenced the iconography of Freyja, the lions drawing the former's chariot becoming large cats. These observations became an extremely common observation in works regarding Old Norse religion until at least the early 1990s. In her book-length study of scholarship on the topic of Freyja, Britt-Mari N\u00e4sstr\u00f6m (1995) is highly critical of this deduction; N\u00e4sstr\u00f6m says that \"these 'parallels' are due to sheer ignorance about the characteristics of Cybele; scholars have not troubled to look into the resemblances and differences between the two goddesses, if any, in support for their arguments for a common origin.\"\nIn art and literature.\nInto the modern period, Freyja was treated as a Scandinavian counterpart to the Roman Venus in, for example, Swedish literature, where the goddess may be associated with romantic love or, conversely, simply as a synonym for \"lust and potency\". In the 18th century, Swedish poet Carl Michael Bellman referred to Stockholm prostitutes in his \"Fredman's Epistles\" as \"the children of Fr\u00f6ja\". In the 19th century, Britt-Mari N\u00e4sstr\u00f6m observes, Swedish Romanticism focused less on Freyja's erotic qualities and more on the image of \"the pining goddess, weeping for her husband\".\nFreyja is mentioned in the first stanza (\"it is called old Denmark and it is Freja's hall\") of the civil national anthem of Denmark, \"Der er et yndigt land\", written by 19th century Danish poet Adam Gottlob Oehlenschl\u00e4ger in 1819. In addition, Oehlenschl\u00e4ger wrote a comedy entitled \"Freyjas alter\" (1818) and a poem \"Freais sal\" featuring the goddess.\nThe 19th century German composer Richard Wagner's \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" opera cycle features \"Freia\", the goddess Freyja combined with the apple-bearing goddess I\u00f0unn.\nIn late 19th century and early 20th century Northern Europe, Freyja was the subject of numerous works of art, including \"Freyja\" by H. E. Freund (statue, 1821\u20131822), \"Freja s\u00f6kande sin make\" (painting, 1852) by Nils Blomm\u00e9r, \"Freyjas Aufnahme uner den G\u00f6ttern\" (charcoal drawing, 1881), and \"Frigg; Freyja\" (drawing, 1883) by Carl Ehrenberg (illustrator), \"Freyja\" (1901) by Carl Emil Doepler d. J., and \"Freyja and the Brisingamen\" by J. Doyle Penrose (painting, 1862\u20131932). Like other Norse goddesses, her name was applied widely in Scandinavia to, for example, \"sweetmeats or to stout carthorses\".\n\"Vanad\u00eds\", one of Freyja's names, is the source of the name of the chemical element vanadium, so named because of its many colored compounds.\nIn popular culture.\nFrigga (sometimes called Freyja) is a fictional character appearing in Marvel Comics starting in 1963. The character in particular is based on the goddess Freyja of Norse mythology.\nStarting in the early 1990s, derivatives of \"Freyja\" began to appear as a given name for girls. According to the Norwegian name database from the Central Statistics Bureau, around 500 women are listed with the first name \"Fr\u00f8ya\" (the modern Norwegian spelling of the goddess's name) in the country. There are also several similar names, such as the first element of the dithematic personal name \"Fr\u00f8ydis\".\nFreyja is featured in several video games including the 2002 Ensemble Studios game \"Age of Mythology\", the 2014 third-person multiplayer online battle arena game \"Smite\", the 2018 Santa Monica Studio game God of War, and in its 2022 sequel \"God of War Ragnar\u00f6k\".\n\"Freya\" is a song by American heavy metal band The Sword from their 2006 debut album \"Age of Winters\". A playable cover version was featured in \"Guitar Hero II\", released the same year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11040", "revid": "50585381", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11040", "title": "First-class cricket", "text": "Cricket played at the highest domestic standard\nFirst-class cricket, along with List A cricket and Twenty20 cricket, is one of the highest-standard forms of cricket. A first-class match is of three or more days scheduled duration between two sides of eleven players each and is officially adjudged to be worthy of the status by virtue of the standard of the competing teams. Matches must allow for the teams to play two innings each, although in practice a team might play only one innings or none at all.\nThe etymology of \"first-class cricket\" is unknown, but the term was used loosely before it acquired official status in 1895, following a meeting of leading English clubs. At a meeting of the Imperial Cricket Conference (ICC) in 1947, it was formally defined on a global basis. A significant omission of the ICC ruling was any attempt to define first-class cricket retrospectively. That has left historians and statisticians with the problem of how to categorise earlier matches, especially those played in Great Britain before 1895. The Association of Cricket Statisticians and Historians (ACS) has published a list of early matches which are believed to have been of a high standard.\nTest cricket, the highest standard of cricket, is statistically a form of first-class cricket, though the term \"first-class\" is mainly used to refer to domestic competition. A player's first-class statistics include any performances in Test matches.\nInitial usage under MCC ruling, May 1894.\nBefore 1894 \"first-class\" was a common adjective applied to cricket matches in England, used loosely to suggest that a match had a high standard; adjectives like \"great\", \"important\" and \"major\" were also loosely applied to such matches, but there tended to be differences of opinion. In the inaugural issue of \"\" on 10 May 1882, the term is used twice on page 2 in reference to the recently completed tour of Australia and New Zealand by Alfred Shaw's XI. The report says it is \"taking\" the first-class matches to be one against Sydney (\"sic\"), two each against Victoria, the Combined team and the Australian Eleven, and another against South Australia. In the fourth issue on 1 June 1882, James Lillywhite refers to first-class matches on the tour but gives a different list.\nThe earliest known match scorecards date from 1744 but few have been found before 1772. The cards for three 1772 matches have survived and scorecards became increasingly common thereafter. At the beginning of the 1860s, there were only four formally constituted county clubs. Sussex was the oldest, formed in 1839, and it had been followed by Kent, Nottinghamshire and Surrey. In the early 1860s, several more county clubs were founded, and questions began to be raised in the sporting press about which should be categorised as first-class, but there was considerable disagreement in the answers. In 1880, the Cricket Reporting Agency was founded. It acquired influence through the decade especially by association with \"Wisden Cricketers' Almanack\" (\"Wisden\") and the press came to generally rely on its information and opinions.\nThe term acquired official status, though limited to matches in Great Britain, following a meeting at Lord's in May 1894 between the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) committee and the secretaries of the clubs involved in the official County Championship, which had begun in 1890. As a result, those clubs became first-class from 1895 along with MCC, Cambridge University, Oxford University, senior cricket touring teams (i.e., Australia and South Africa at that time) and other teams designated as such by MCC (e.g., North v South, Gentlemen v Players and occasional \"elevens\" which consisted of recognised first-class players). Officially, therefore, the inaugural first-class match was the opening game of the 1895 season between MCC and Nottinghamshire at Lord's on 1 and 2 May, MCC winning by 37 runs.\n\"Test match\" was another loosely applied term at the time but the first list of matches considered to be \"Tests\" was conceived and published by South Australian journalist Clarence P. Moody in his 1894 book, \"Australian Cricket and Cricketers, 1856 to 1893\u201394\". His proposal was widely accepted after a list of 39 matches was reproduced in the 28 December 1894 issue of \"Cricket\" magazine. The list began with the Melbourne Cricket Ground match played 15\u201317 March 1877 and ended with a recent match at the Association Ground, Sydney played 14\u201320 December 1894. All of Moody's matches, plus four additional ones, were retrospectively recognised as Test matches and also, thereby, as first-class matches.\nFormal definition under ICC ruling, May 1947.\nThe term \"first-class cricket\" was formally defined by the then Imperial Cricket Conference (ICC) on 19 May 1947. It was made clear that the definition \"will not have retrospective effect\". The definition is as follows:\nA match of three or more days' duration between two sides of eleven players officially adjudged first-class, shall be regarded as a first-class fixture. Matches in which either team have more than eleven players or which are scheduled for less than three days shall not be regarded as first-class. The Governing body in each country shall decide the status of teams.\nFor example, MCC was authorised to determine the status of matches played in Great Britain. To all intents and purposes, the 1947 ICC definition confirmed the 1894 MCC definition, and gave it international recognition and usage.\nHence, official judgment of status is the responsibility of the governing body in each country that is a \"full member\" of the International Cricket Council (ICC). The governing body grants first-class status to international teams and to domestic teams that are representative of the country's highest playing standard. Later ICC rulings make it possible for international teams from \"associate members\" of the ICC to achieve first-class status but it is dependent on the status of their opponents in a given match.\nDefinition.\nAccording to the ICC definition, a match may be adjudged first-class if:\nA Test match is a first-class match played between two ICC full member countries, subject to their current status at the ICC and the application of ICC conditions when the match is played.\nRecognised matches.\nIn 2010, the ICC published its \"Classification of Official Cricket\" which includes the criteria with which a match must comply to achieve a desired categorisation. In the section on first-class cricket, there is a list of the types of match that \"should\" qualify. It is important to note, given the differences in opinion about what constitutes a first-class match, that the ICC clearly stipulates that its match type list \"is not exhaustive and is merely indicative of the matches which would fall into the first-class definition\". For example, the list includes matches of recognised first-class teams \"versus\" international touring teams; and the leading domestic championships (using their then-current names) such as the County Championship, Sheffield Shield, Ranji Trophy, etc.\nRetrospective classification of matches played before the definitions.\nThe absence of any ICC ruling about matches played before 1947 (or before 1895 in Great Britain) is problematic for those cricket statisticians who wish to categorise earlier matches in the same way. They have responded by compiling their own match lists and allocating a strictly \"unofficial\" first-class status to the matches they consider to have been of a high standard. It is therefore a matter of opinion only with no official support. Inevitable differences have arisen and there are variations in published cricket statistics. In November 2021, the ICC retrospectively applied first-class status to women's cricket, aligning it with the men's game.\nIssue for statisticians.\nA key issue for the statisticians is when first-class cricket for their purpose is deemed to have begun. Writing in 1951, Roy Webber argued that the majority of matches prior to 1864 (i.e., the year in which overarm bowling was legalised) \"cannot be regarded as first-class\" and their records are used \"for their historical associations\". This drew a line between what was important historically and what should form part of the statistical record. Hence, for pre-1895 (i.e., in Great Britain) cricket matches, \"first-class\" is essentially a statistical concept while the historical concept is broader and takes account of historical significance. Webber's rationale was that cricket was \"generally weak before 1864\" (there was a greater and increasingly more organised effort to promote county cricket from about that time) and match details were largely incomplete, especially bowling analyses, which hindered compilation of records. According to Webber's view, the inaugural first-class match was the opening game of the 1864 season between Cambridge University and MCC at Fenner's on 12 and 13 May, Cambridge winning by 6 wickets.\nImportant matches list.\nWhen the Association of Cricket Statisticians and Historians (ACS) published its \"Guide to First-Class Cricket Matches Played in the British Isles\" in 1982, it tentatively agreed with Webber's 1864 start date by saying that \"the line between first-class and other matches becomes more easily discernible about that date\". A year earlier, the ACS had published its \"Guide to Important Cricket Matches Played in the British Isles, 1709\u20131863\" in which it listed all the known matches during that period which it considered to have historical importance. The ACS did stipulate that they had taken a more lenient view of importance regarding matches played in the 18th century than they did of matches played in the 19th century. As they explained, surviving details of 18th century matches are typically incomplete while there is a fairly comprehensive store of data about 19th century matches, certainly since 1825.\nEarlier startpoints suggested.\nSubsequently, Webber's view was challenged by Bill Frindall who believed that 1815 should be the startpoint to encompass the entire roundarm bowling phase of cricket's history, although roundarm did not begin in earnest until 1827. In Frindall's view, the inaugural first-class match should have been the opening game of the 1815 season between MCC and Middlesex at Lord's on 31 May and 1 June, Middlesex winning by 16 runs. Notwithstanding Frindall's reputation, Webber's view has been revived and reinforced in recent times. For example, the Kent researcher Derek Carlaw began his study of Kent cricketers since 1806 by stating: \"Part One is confined to players who appeared for Kent in important matches from 1806 to 1863 and first-class matches from 1864 to 1914\".\nOn the internet, the \"CricketArchive\" (CA) and \"ESPN Cricinfo\" (CI) databases both say the earliest first-class match was Hampshire v England at Broadhalfpenny Down on 24 and 25 June 1772. At that time, cricket matches were played with a two-stump wicket and exclusively underarm bowling, although other features of the modern game had been introduced. The opinion of these databases has been repudiated by both \"Wisden\" and \"Playfair Cricket Annual\". \"Wisden\" agrees with Frindall by commencing its first-class records in 1815. \"Playfair\" supports Webber and begins its records in 1864.\nThe status of earlier matches, including many in the ACS' \"Important Matches\" guide, which have left no scorecard and for which only a brief announcement or report exists, must be based on other factors. Contemporary importance was often measured by the amount of money at stake and the fact that a match was deemed notable enough to be reported in the press. The 18th century matches in the ACS list were primarily compiled to assist historians. The earliest match known to have been accorded superior status in a contemporary report (i.e., termed \"a great match\" in this case) and to have been played for a large sum of money was one in Sussex between two unnamed eleven-a-side teams contesting \"fifty guineas apiece\" in June 1697, a match of enormous historical significance but with no statistical data recorded.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11041", "revid": "44543923", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11041", "title": "Ferdinand de Saussure", "text": "Swiss linguist and philosopher (1857\u20131913)\nFerdinand Mongin de Saussure (; ; 26 November 1857\u00a0\u2013 22 February 1913) was a Swiss linguist, semiotician and philosopher. His ideas laid a foundation for many significant developments in both linguistics and semiotics in the 20th century. He is widely considered one of the founders of 20th-century linguistics and one of two major founders (together with Charles Sanders Peirce) of semiotics, or \"semiology\", as Saussure called it.\nOne of his translators, Roy Harris, summarized Saussure's contribution to linguistics and the study of \"the whole range of human sciences. It is particularly marked in linguistics, philosophy, psychoanalysis, psychology, sociology and anthropology.\" Although they have undergone extension and critique over time, the dimensions of organization introduced by Saussure continue to inform contemporary approaches to the phenomenon of language. As Leonard Bloomfield stated after reviewing Saussure's work: \"he has given us the theoretical basis for a science of human speech\".\nBiography.\nSaussure was born in Geneva in 1857. His father, Henri Louis Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric de Saussure, was a mineralogist, entomologist, and taxonomist. He showed signs of considerable talent and intellectual ability as early as the age of fourteen. In the autumn of 1870, he began attending the private school called the Institution Martine (previously the Institution Lecoultre until 1969) in Geneva. There he lived with the family of a classmate, Elie David. After graduating at the top of class, Saussure expected to continue his studies at the Gymnase de Gen\u00e8ve, but his father decided he was not mature enough at fourteen and a half, and sent him to the Coll\u00e8ge de Gen\u00e8ve instead. The college also housed the Gymnase de Gen\u00e8ve and some of its teachers also taught at the Coll\u00e8ge. Saussure, however, was not pleased, as he complained: \"I entered the Coll\u00e8ge de Gen\u00e8ve, to waste a year there as completely as a year can be wasted.\"\nHe spent the year studying Latin, Ancient Greek and Sanskrit, and attended a variety of courses at the University of Geneva. He also purposely avoided taking the course in general linguistics due to its bad reputation, arranging instead to study foundational works in comparative-historical linguistics with Louis Morel, a \"Privatdozent\". He began graduate work at the University of Leipzig and arrived at the university in October 1876.\nTwo years later, at 21, Saussure published a book entitled \"M\u00e9moire sur le syst\u00e8me primitif des voyelles dans les langues indo-europ\u00e9ennes\" (\"Dissertation on the Primitive Vowel System in Indo-European Languages\"). After this, he studied for a year at the University of Berlin under the \"Privatdozent\" Heinrich Zimmer, with whom he studied Celtic and Hermann Oldenberg with whom he continued his studies of Sanskrit. He returned to Leipzig to defend his doctoral dissertation \"De l'emploi du g\u00e9nitif absolu en Sanscrit\", and was awarded his doctorate in February 1880. Soon, he relocated to the University of Paris, where he lectured on Sanskrit, Gothic, Old High German, and occasionally other subjects.\nFerdinand de Saussure is one of the world's most quoted linguists, which is remarkable as he hardly published anything during his lifetime. Even his few scientific articles are not unproblematic. Thus, for example, his publication on Lithuanian phonetics is mostly taken from studies by the Lithuanian researcher Friedrich Kurschat, with whom Saussure traveled through Lithuania in August 1880 for two weeks and whose (German) books Saussure had read. Saussure, who had studied some basic grammar of Lithuanian in Leipzig for one semester but was unable to speak the language, was thus dependent on Kurschat.\nSaussure taught at the \u00c9cole pratique des hautes \u00e9tudes for eleven years during which he was named Chevalier de la L\u00e9gion d'Honneur (Knight of the Legion of Honor). When offered a professorship in Geneva in 1892, he returned to Switzerland. Saussure lectured on Sanskrit and Indo-European at the University of Geneva for the remainder of his life. It was not until 1907 that Saussure began teaching the Course of General Linguistics, which he offered three times ending in the summer of 1911. He died in 1913 in Vufflens-le-Ch\u00e2teau, Vaud, Switzerland. His brothers were the linguist and Esperantist Ren\u00e9 de Saussure, and scholar of ancient Chinese astronomy, L\u00e9opold de Saussure. His son Raymond de Saussure was a psychiatrist and prolific psychoanalytic theorist, who was trained under Sigmund Freud himself.\nSaussure attempted at various times in the 1880s and 1890s, to write a book on general linguistic matters. His lectures about important principles of language description in Geneva between 1907 and 1911 were collected and published by his pupils posthumously in the famous \"Cours de linguistique g\u00e9n\u00e9rale\" (\"Course in General Linguistics\") in 1916. Work published in his lifetime includes two monographs and a few dozen papers and notes, all of them collected in a volume of some 600 pages published in 1922. Saussure did not publish anything of his work on ancient poetics even though he had filled more than a hundred notebooks. Jean Starobinski edited and presented material from them in the 1970s and more has been published since then. Some of his manuscripts, including an unfinished essay discovered in 1996, were published in \"Writings in General Linguistics\", but most of the material in it had already been published in Engler's critical edition of the \"Cours\", in 1967 and 1974. Today it is clear that \"Cours\" owes much to its so-called editors Charles Bally and Albert Sechehaye and various details are difficult to track to Saussure himself or his manuscripts.\nWork and influence.\nSaussure's theoretical reconstructions of the Proto-Indo-European language vocalic system and particularly his theory of laryngeals, otherwise unattested at the time, bore fruit and found confirmation after the decipherment of Hittite in the work of later generations of linguists such as \u00c9mile Benveniste and Walter Couvreur, who both drew direct inspiration from their reading of the 1878 \"M\u00e9moire\".\nSaussure had a major impact on the development of linguistic theory in the first half of the 20th century with his notions becoming incorporated in the central tenets of structural linguistics. His main contributions to structuralism include his notion of the arbitrariness of the linguistic sign. There is also his theory of a two-tiered reality about language. The first is the \"langue\", the abstract and invisible layer, while the second, the \"parole\", refers to the actual speech that we hear in real life. This framework was later adopted by Claude Levi-Strauss, who used the two-tiered model to determine the reality of myths. His idea was that all myths have an underlying pattern, which forms the structure that makes them myths.\nIn Europe, the most important work after Saussure's death was done by the Prague school. Most notably, Nikolay Trubetzkoy and Roman Jakobson headed the efforts of the Prague School in setting the course of phonological theory in the decades from 1940. Jakobson's universalizing structural-functional theory of phonology, based on a markedness hierarchy of distinctive features, was the first successful solution of a plane of linguistic analysis according to the Saussurean hypotheses. Elsewhere, Louis Hjelmslev and the Copenhagen School proposed new interpretations of linguistics from structuralist theoretical frameworks.\nIn America, where the term \"structuralism\" became highly ambiguous, Saussure's ideas informed the distributionalism of Leonard Bloomfield, but his influence remained limited. Systemic functional linguistics is a theory considered to be based firmly on the Saussurean principles of the sign, albeit with some modifications. Ruqaiya Hasan describes systemic functional linguistics as a 'post-Saussurean' linguistic theory. Michael Halliday argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Saussure took the sign as the organizing concept for linguistic structure, using it to express the conventional nature of language in the phrase \"l'arbitraire du signe\". This has the effect of highlighting what is, in fact, the one point of arbitrariness in the system, namely the phonological shape of words, and hence allows the non-arbitrariness of the rest to emerge with greater clarity. An example of something that is distinctly non-arbitrary is the way different kinds of meaning in language are expressed by different kinds of grammatical structure, as appears when linguistic structure is interpreted in functional terms\n\"Course in General Linguistics\".\nSaussure's most influential work, \"Course in General Linguistics\" (\"Cours de linguistique g\u00e9n\u00e9rale\"), was published posthumously in 1916 by former students Charles Bally and Albert Sechehaye, based on notes taken from Saussure's lectures in Geneva. The \"Course\" became one of the seminal linguistics works of the 20th century not primarily for the content (many of the ideas had been anticipated in the works of other 20th-century linguists) but for the innovative approach that Saussure applied in discussing linguistic phenomena.\nIts central notion is that language may be analyzed as a formal system of differential elements, apart from the messy dialectics of real-time production and comprehension. Examples of these elements include his notion of the linguistic sign, which is composed of the signifier and the signified. Though the sign may also have a referent, Saussure took that to lie beyond the linguist's purview.\nThroughout the book, he stated that a linguist can develop a diachronic analysis of a text or theory of language but must learn just as much or more about the language/text as it exists at any moment in time (i.e. \"synchronically\"): \"Language is a system of signs that expresses ideas\". A science that studies the life of signs within society and is a part of social and general psychology. Saussure believed that semiotics is concerned with everything that can be taken as a sign, and he called it semiology.\nLaryngeal theory.\nWhile a student, Saussure published an important work about Proto-Indo-European, which explained unusual forms of word roots in terms of lost phonemes he called \"sonant coefficients\". The Scandinavian scholar Hermann M\u00f6ller suggested that they might be laryngeal consonants, leading to what is now known as the laryngeal theory. After Hittite texts were discovered and deciphered, Polish linguist Jerzy Kury\u0142owicz recognized that a Hittite consonant stood in the positions where Saussure had theorized a lost phoneme some 48 years earlier, confirming the theory. It has been argued that Saussure's work on this problem, systematizing the irregular word forms by hypothesizing then-unknown phonemes, stimulated his development of structuralism.\nInfluence outside linguistics.\nThe principles and methods employed by structuralism were later adapted in diverse fields by French intellectuals such as Roland Barthes, Jacques Lacan, Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, and Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss. Such scholars took influence from Saussure's ideas in their areas of study (literary studies/philosophy, psychoanalysis, anthropology, etc.).\nView of language.\nSaussure approaches the theory of language from two different perspectives. On the one hand, language is a system of signs. That is, a semiotic system; or a semiological system as he calls it. On the other hand, a language is also a social phenomenon: a product of the language community.\nLanguage as semiology.\nThe bilateral sign.\nOne of Saussure's key contributions to semiotics lies in what he called \"semiology\", the concept of the bilateral (two-sided) sign which consists of 'the signifier' (a linguistic form, e.g. a word) and 'the signified' (the meaning of the form). Saussure supported the argument for the arbitrariness of the sign although he did not deny the fact that some words are onomatopoeic, or claim that picture-like symbols are fully arbitrary. Saussure also did not consider the linguistic sign as random, but as historically cemented. All in all, he did not invent the philosophy of arbitrariness but made a very influential contribution to it.\nThe arbitrariness of words of different languages itself is a fundamental concept in Western thinking of language, dating back to Ancient Greek philosophers. The question of whether words are natural or arbitrary (and artificially made by people) returned as a controversial topic during the Age of Enlightenment when the medieval scholastic dogma, that languages were created by God, became opposed by the advocates of humanistic philosophy. There were efforts to construct a 'universal language', based on the lost Adamic language, with various attempts to uncover universal words or characters which would be readily understood by all people regardless of their nationality. John Locke, on the other hand, was among those who believed that languages were a rational human innovation, and argued for the arbitrariness of words.\nSaussure took it for granted in his time that \"No one disputes the principle of the arbitrary nature of the sign.\" He however disagreed with the common notion that each word corresponds \"to the thing that it names\" or what is called the referent in modern semiotics. For example, in Saussure's notion, the word 'tree' does not refer to a tree as a physical object, but to the psychological \"concept\" of a tree. The linguistic sign thus arises from the psychological \"association\" between the signifier (a 'sound-image') and the signified (a 'concept'). There can therefore be no linguistic expression without meaning, but also no meaning without linguistic expression. Saussure's structuralism, as it later became called, therefore includes an implication of linguistic relativity. However, Saussure's view has been described instead as a form of semantic holism that acknowledged that the interconnection between terms in a language was not fully arbitrary and only methodologically bracketed the relationship between linguistic terms and the physical world.\nThe naming of spectral colours exemplifies how meaning and expression arise simultaneously from their interlinkage. Different colour frequencies are per se meaningless, or mere \"substance\" or meaning potential. Likewise, phonemic combinations that are not associated with any content are only meaningless expression potential, and therefore not considered as \"signs\". It is only when a region of the spectrum is outlined and given an arbitrary name, for example, 'blue', that the sign emerges. The sign consists of the \"signifier\" ('blue') and the \"signified\" (the colour region), and of the associative link which connects them. Arising from an arbitrary demarcation of meaning potential, the signified is not a property of the physical world. In Saussure's concept, language is ultimately not a function of reality, but a self-contained system. Thus, Saussure's semiology entails a bilateral (two-sided) perspective of semiotics.\nThe same idea is applied to any concept. For example, natural law does not dictate which plants are 'trees' and which are 'shrubs' or a different type of woody plant; or whether these should be divided into further groups. Like blue, all signs gain semantic \"value\" in opposition to other signs of the system (e.g. red, colourless). If more signs emerge (e.g. 'marine blue'), the semantic field of the original word may narrow down. Conversely, words may become antiquated, whereby competition for the semantic field lessens. Or, the meaning of a word may change altogether.\nAfter his death, structural and functional linguists applied Saussure's concept to the analysis of the linguistic form as motivated by meaning. The opposite direction of the linguistic expressions as giving rise to the conceptual system, on the other hand, became the foundation of the post-Second World War structuralists who adopted Saussure's concept of structural linguistics as the model for all human sciences as the study of how language shapes our concepts of the world. Thus, Saussure's model became important not only for linguistics but for humanities and social sciences as a whole.\nOpposition theory.\nA second key contribution comes from Saussure's notion of the organisation of language based on the principle of opposition. Saussure made a distinction between meaning (significance) and \"value\". On the semantic side, concepts gain value by being contrasted with related concepts, creating a conceptual system that could in modern terms be described as a semantic network. On the level of the sound-image, phonemes and morphemes gain value by being contrasted with related phonemes and morphemes; and on the level of the grammar, parts of speech gain value by being contrasted with each other. Each element within each system is eventually contrasted with all other elements in different types of relations so that no two elements have the same value:\n\"Within the same language, all words used to express related ideas limit each other reciprocally; synonyms like French \"redouter\" 'dread', \"craindre\" 'fear,' and \"avoir peur\" 'be afraid' have value only through their opposition: if \"redouter\" did not exist, all its content would go to its competitors.\"\nSaussure defined his theory in terms of binary oppositions: \"sign\u2014signified, meaning\u2014value, language\u2014speech, synchronic\u2014diachronic, internal linguistics\u2014external linguistics\", and so on. The related term markedness denotes the assessment of value between binary oppositions. These were studied extensively by post-war structuralists such as Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss to explain the organisation of social conceptualisation, and later by the post-structuralists to criticise it. Cognitive semantics also diverges from Saussure on this point, emphasizing the importance of similarity in defining categories in the mind as well as opposition.\nBased on markedness theory, the Prague Linguistic Circle made great advances in the study of phonetics reforming it as the systemic study of phonology. Although the terms opposition and markedness are rightly associated with Saussure's concept of language as a semiological system, he did not invent the terms and concepts that had been discussed by various 19th-century grammarians before him.\nLanguage as a social phenomenon.\nIn his treatment of language as a 'social fact', Saussure touches on topics that were controversial in his time, and that would continue to split opinions in the post-war structuralist movement. Saussure's relationship with 19th-century theories of language was somewhat ambivalent. These included social Darwinism and V\u00f6lkerpsychologie or Volksgeist thinking which were regarded by many intellectuals as nationalist and racist pseudoscience.\nSaussure, however, considered the ideas useful if treated properly. Instead of discarding August Schleicher's organicism or Heymann Steinthal's \"spirit of the nation\", he restricted their sphere in ways that were meant to preclude any chauvinistic interpretations.\nOrganic analogy.\nSaussure exploited the sociobiological concept of language as a living organism. He criticises August Schleicher and Max M\u00fcller's ideas of languages as organisms struggling for living space but settles with promoting the idea of linguistics as a natural science as long as the study of the 'organism' of language excludes its adaptation to its territory. This concept would be modified in post-Saussurean linguistics by the Prague circle linguists Roman Jakobson and Nikolai Trubetzkoy, and eventually diminished.\nThe speech circuit.\nPerhaps the most famous of Saussure's ideas is the distinction between language and speech (Fr. \"langue et parole\"), with 'speech' referring to the individual occurrences of language usage. These constitute two parts of three of Saussure's 'speech circuit' (\"circuit de parole\"). The third part is the brain, that is, the mind of the individual member of the language community. This idea is in principle borrowed from Steinthal, so Saussure's concept of a language as a social fact corresponds to \"Volksgeist\", although he was careful to preclude any nationalistic interpretations. In Saussure's and Durkheim's thinking, social facts and norms do not elevate the individuals but shackle them. Saussure's definition of language is statistical rather than idealised.\n\"Among all the individuals that are linked together by speech, some sort of average will be set up : all will reproduce \u2014 not exactly of course, but approximately \u2014 the same signs united with the same concepts.\"\nSaussure argues that language is a 'social fact'; a conventionalised set of rules or norms relating to speech. When at least two people are engaged in conversation, there forms a communicative circuit between the minds of the individual speakers. Saussure explains that language, as a social system, is neither situated in \"speech\" nor the mind. It only properly exists between the two within the loop. It is located in \u2013 and is the product of \u2013 the collective mind of the linguistic group. An individual has to learn the normative rules of language and can never control them.\nThe task of the linguist is to study the language by analysing samples of speech. For practical reasons, this is ordinarily the analysis of written texts. The idea that language is studied through texts is by no means revolutionary as it had been the common practice since the beginning of linguistics. Saussure does not advise against introspection and takes up many linguistic examples without reference to a source in a text corpus. The idea that linguistics is not the study of the mind, however, contradicts Wilhelm Wundt's V\u00f6lkerpsychologie in Saussure's contemporary context; and in a later context, generative grammar and cognitive linguistics.\nA legacy of ideological disputes.\nStructuralism versus generative grammar.\nSaussure's influence was restricted to American linguistics which was dominated by the advocates of Wilhelm Wundt's psychological approach to language, especially Leonard Bloomfield (1887\u20131949). The Bloomfieldian school rejected Saussure's and other structuralists' sociological or even anti-psychological (e.g. Louis Hjelmslev, Lucien Tesni\u00e8re) approaches to the theory of language. Problematically, the post-Bloomfieldian school was nicknamed 'American structuralism'. Although Bloomfield denounced Wundt's V\u00f6lkerpsychologie and opted for behavioural psychology in his 1933 textbook \"Language\", he and other American linguists stuck to Wundt's practice of analysing the grammatical object as part of the verb phrase. Since this practice is not semantically motivated, they argued for the disconnectedness of syntax from semantics, thus fully rejecting structuralism.\nThe question remained why the object should be in the verb phrase, vexing American linguists for decades. The post-Bloomfieldian approach was eventually reformed as a sociobiological framework by Noam Chomsky who argued that linguistics is a cognitive science; and claimed that linguistic structures are the manifestation of a random mutation in the human genome. Advocates of the new school, generative grammar, claim that Saussure's structuralism has been reformed and replaced by Chomsky's modern approach to linguistics. Jan Koster asserts:\nit is certainly the case that Saussure considered the most important linguist of the century in Europe until the 1950s, hardly plays a role in current theoretical thinking about language. As a result of the Chomskyan revolution, linguistics has gone through a number of conceptual transformations which have led to all kinds of technical pre-occupations that are far beyond linguistic practice of the days of Saussure. For the most it seems Saussure has rightly sunk into near oblivion.\nFrench historian and philosopher Fran\u00e7ois Dosse however argues that there have been various misunderstandings. He points out that Chomsky's criticism of 'structuralism' is directed at the Bloomfieldian school and not the proper address of the term; and that structural linguistics is not to be reduced to mere sentence analysis. It is also argued that\n\"'Chomsky the Saussurean' is nothing but \"an academic fable\". This fable is a result of misreading \u2013 by Chomsky himself (1964) and also by others \u2013 of Saussure's \"la langue\" (in the singular form) as generativist concept of 'competence' and, therefore, its grammar as the Universal Grammar (UG).\"\nSaussure versus the social Darwinists.\nSaussure's \"Course in General Linguistics\" begins and ends with a criticism of 19th-century linguistics where he is especially critical of Volkgeist thinking and the evolutionary linguistics of August Schleicher and his colleagues. Saussure's ideas replaced social Darwinism in Europe as it was banished from humanities at the end of World War II.\nThe publication of Richard Dawkins's memetics in 1976 brought the Darwinian idea of linguistic units as cultural replicators back to vogue. It became necessary for adherents of this movement to redefine linguistics in a way that would be simultaneously anti-Saussurean and anti-Chomskyan. This led to a redefinition of old humanistic terms such as structuralism, formalism, functionalism, and constructionism along Darwinian lines through debates that were marked by an acrimonious tone. In a functionalism\u2013formalism debate of the decades following \"The Selfish Gene\", the 'functionalism' camp attacking Saussure's legacy includes frameworks such as Cognitive Linguistics, Construction Grammar, Usage-based linguistics, and Emergent Linguistics. Arguing for 'functional-typological theory', William Croft criticises Saussure's use of the organic analogy:\nWhen comparing functional-typological theory to biological theory, one must take care to avoid a caricature of the latter. In particular, in comparing the structure of language to an ecosystem, one must not assume that in contemporary biological theory, it is believed that an organism possesses a perfect adaptation to a stable niche inside an ecosystem in equilibrium. The analogy of a language as a perfectly adapted 'organic' system where \"tout se tient\" is a characteristic of the structuralist approach, and was prominent in early structuralist writing. The static view of adaptation in biology is not tenable in the face of empirical evidence of nonadaptive variation and competing adaptive motivations of organisms.\nStructural linguist Henning Andersen disagrees with Croft. He criticises memetics and other models of cultural evolution and points out that the concept of 'adaptation' is not to be taken in linguistics in the same meaning as in biology. Humanistic and structuralistic notions are likewise defended by Esa Itkonen and Jacques Fran\u00e7ois; the Saussurean standpoint is explained and defended by Tom\u00e1\u0161 Hoskovec, representing the Prague Linguistic Circle.\nConversely, other cognitive linguists claim to continue and expand Saussure's work on the bilateral sign. Dutch philologist Elise Elffers, however, argues that their view of the subject is incompatible with Saussure's ideas. The term 'structuralism' continues to be used in structural\u2013functional linguistics which despite the contrary claims defines itself as a humanistic approach to language.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11042", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11042", "title": "Fat", "text": "Esters of fatty acid or triglycerides\nIn nutrition, biology, and chemistry, fat usually means any ester of fatty acids, or a mixture of such compounds, most commonly those that occur in living beings or in food.\nThe term often refers specifically to triglycerides (triple esters of glycerol), that are the main components of vegetable oils and of fatty tissue in animals; or, even more narrowly, to triglycerides that are solid or semisolid at room temperature, thus excluding oils. The term may also be used more broadly as a synonym of lipid\u2014any substance of biological relevance, composed of carbon, hydrogen, or oxygen, that is insoluble in water but soluble in non-polar solvents. In this sense, besides the triglycerides, the term would include several other types of compounds like mono- and diglycerides, phospholipids (such as lecithin), sterols (such as cholesterol), waxes (such as beeswax), and free fatty acids, which are usually present in human diet in smaller amounts.\nFats are one of the three main macronutrient groups in human diet, along with carbohydrates and proteins, and the main components of common food products like milk, butter, tallow, lard, salt pork, and cooking oils. They are a major and dense source of food energy for many animals and play important structural and metabolic functions in most living beings, including energy storage, waterproofing, and thermal insulation. The human body can produce the fat it requires from other food ingredients, except for a few essential fatty acids that must be included in the diet. Dietary fats are also the carriers of some flavor and aroma ingredients and vitamins that are not water-soluble.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiological importance.\nIn humans and many animals, fats serve both as energy sources and as stores for energy in excess of what the body needs immediately. Each gram of fat when burned or metabolized releases about nine food calories (37 kJ = 8.8 kcal).\nFats are also sources of essential fatty acids, an important dietary requirement. Vitamins A, D, E, and K are fat-soluble, meaning they can only be digested, absorbed, and transported in conjunction with fats.\nFats play a vital role in maintaining healthy skin and hair, insulating body organs against shock, maintaining body temperature, and promoting healthy cell function. Fat also serves as a useful buffer against a host of diseases. When a particular substance, whether chemical or biotic, reaches unsafe levels in the bloodstream, the body can effectively dilute\u2014or at least maintain equilibrium of\u2014the offending substances by storing it in new fat tissue. This helps to protect vital organs, until such time as the offending substances can be metabolized or removed from the body by such means as excretion, urination, accidental or intentional bloodletting, sebum excretion, and hair growth.\nAdipose tissue.\nIn animals, adipose tissue (fatty tissue) is the body's means of storing metabolic energy over extended periods of time. Adipocytes (fat cells) store fat derived from the diet and from liver metabolism. Under energy stress these cells may degrade their stored fat to supply fatty acids and also glycerol to the circulation. These metabolic activities are regulated by several hormones (e.g., insulin, glucagon and epinephrine). Adipose tissue also secretes the hormone leptin.\nProduction and processing.\nA variety of chemical and physical techniques are used for the production and processing of fats, both industrially and in cottage or home settings. They include:\nMetabolism.\nThe pancreatic lipase acts at the ester bond, hydrolyzing the bond and \"releasing\" the fatty acid. In triglyceride form, lipids cannot be absorbed by the duodenum. Fatty acids, monoglycerides (one glycerol, one fatty acid), and some diglycerides are absorbed by the duodenum, once the triglycerides have been broken down.\nIn the intestine, following the secretion of lipases and bile, triglycerides are split into monoacylglycerol and free fatty acids in a process called lipolysis. They are subsequently moved to absorptive enterocyte cells lining the intestines. The triglycerides are rebuilt in the enterocytes from their fragments and packaged together with cholesterol and proteins to form chylomicrons. These are excreted from the cells and collected by the lymph system and transported to the large vessels near the heart before being mixed into the blood. Various tissues can capture the chylomicrons, releasing the triglycerides to be used as a source of energy. Liver cells can synthesize and store triglycerides. When the body requires fatty acids as an energy source, the hormone glucagon signals the breakdown of the triglycerides by hormone-sensitive lipase to release free fatty acids. As the brain cannot utilize fatty acids as an energy source (unless converted to a ketone), the glycerol component of triglycerides can be converted into glucose, via gluconeogenesis by conversion into dihydroxyacetone phosphate and then into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, for brain fuel when it is broken down. Fat cells may also be broken down for that reason if the brain's needs ever outweigh the body's.\nTriglycerides cannot pass through cell membranes freely. Special enzymes on the walls of blood vessels called lipoprotein lipases must break down triglycerides into free fatty acids and glycerol. Fatty acids can then be taken up by cells via fatty acid transport proteins (FATPs).\nTriglycerides, as major components of very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and chylomicrons, play an important role in metabolism as energy sources and transporters of dietary fat. They contain more than twice as much energy (approximately 9kcal/g or 38kJ/g) as carbohydrates (approximately 4kcal/g or 17kJ/g).\nNutritional and health aspects.\nThe most common type of fat, in human diet and most living beings, is a triglyceride, an ester of the triple alcohol glycerol H(\u2013CHOH\u2013)3H and three fatty acids. The molecule of a triglyceride can be described as resulting from a condensation reaction (specifically, esterification) between each of glycerol's \u2013OH groups and the HO\u2013 part of the carboxyl group of each fatty acid, forming an ester bridge with elimination of a water molecule H2O.\nOther less common types of fats include diglycerides and monoglycerides, where the esterification is limited to two or just one of glycerol's \u2013OH groups. Other alcohols, such as cetyl alcohol (predominant in spermaceti), may replace glycerol. In the phospholipids, one of the fatty acids is replaced by phosphoric acid or a monoester thereof.\nThe benefits and risks of various amounts and types of dietary fats have been the object of much study, and are still highly controversial topics.\nEssential fatty acids.\nThere are two essential fatty acids (EFAs) in human nutrition: alpha-Linolenic acid (an omega-3 fatty acid) and linoleic acid (an omega-6 fatty acid). The adult body can synthesize other lipids that it needs from these two.\nDietary sources.\nSaturated vs. unsaturated fats.\nDifferent foods contain different amounts of fat with different proportions of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. Some animal products, like beef and dairy products made with whole or reduced fat milk like yogurt, ice cream, cheese and butter have mostly saturated fatty acids (and some have significant contents of dietary cholesterol). Other animal products, like pork, poultry, eggs, and seafood have mostly unsaturated fats. Industrialized baked goods may use fats with high unsaturated fat contents as well, especially those containing partially hydrogenated oils, and processed foods that are deep-fried in hydrogenated oil are high in saturated fat content.\nPlants and fish oil generally contain a higher proportion of unsaturated acids, although there are exceptions such as coconut oil and palm kernel oil. Foods containing unsaturated fats include avocado, nuts, olive oils, and vegetable oils such as canola.\nMany scientific studies have found that replacing saturated fats with \"cis\" unsaturated fats in the diet reduces risk of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), diabetes, or death. These studies prompted many medical organizations and public health departments, including the World Health Organization (WHO), to officially issue that advice. Some countries with such recommendations include:\nA 2004 review concluded that \"no lower safe limit of specific saturated fatty acid intakes has been identified\" and recommended that the influence of varying saturated fatty acid intakes against a background of different individual lifestyles and genetic backgrounds should be the focus in future studies.\nThis advice is often oversimplified by labeling the two kinds of fats as \"bad fats\" and \"good fats\", respectively. However, since the fats and oils in most natural and traditionally processed foods contain both unsaturated and saturated fatty acids, the complete exclusion of saturated fat is unrealistic and possibly unwise. For instance, some foods rich in saturated fat, such as coconut and palm oil, are an important source of cheap dietary calories for a large fraction of the population in developing countries.\nConcerns were also expressed at a 2010 conference of the American Dietetic Association that a blanket recommendation to avoid saturated fats could drive people to also reduce the amount of polyunsaturated fats, which may have health benefits, and/or replace fats by refined carbohydrates \u2014 which carry a high risk of obesity and heart disease.\nFor these reasons, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, for example, recommends to consume less than 10% (7% for high-risk groups) of calories from saturated fat, with 15-30% of total calories from all fat. A general 7% limit was recommended also by the American Heart Association (AHA) in 2006.\nThe WHO/FAO report also recommended replacing fats so as to reduce the content of myristic and palmitic acids, specifically.\nThe so-called Mediterranean diet, prevalent in many countries in the Mediterranean Sea area, includes more total fat than the diet of Northern European countries, but most of it is in the form of unsaturated fatty acids (specifically, monounsaturated and omega-3) from olive oil and fish, vegetables, and certain meats like lamb, while consumption of saturated fat is minimal in comparison.\nA 2017 review found evidence that a Mediterranean-style diet could reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases, overall cancer incidence, neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, and mortality rate. A 2018 review showed that a Mediterranean-like diet may improve overall health status, such as reduced risk of non-communicable diseases. It also may reduce the social and economic costs of diet-related illnesses.\nA small number of contemporary reviews have challenged this negative view of saturated fats. For example, an evaluation of evidence from 1966 to 1973 of the observed health impact of replacing dietary saturated fat with linoleic acid found that it \"increased\" rates of death from all causes, coronary heart disease, and cardiovascular disease. These studies have been disputed by many scientists, and the consensus in the medical community is that saturated fat and cardiovascular disease are closely related. Still, these discordant studies fueled debate over the merits of substituting polyunsaturated fats for saturated fats.\nCardiovascular disease.\nThe effect of saturated fat on cardiovascular disease has been extensively studied. The general consensus is that there is evidence of moderate-quality of a strong, consistent, and graded relationship between saturated fat intake, blood cholesterol levels, and the incidence of cardiovascular disease. The relationships are accepted as causal, including by many government and medical organizations.\nA 2017 review by the AHA estimated that replacement of saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat in the American diet could reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases by 30%.\nThe consumption of saturated fat is generally considered a risk factor for dyslipidemia\u2014abnormal blood lipid levels, including high total cholesterol, high levels of triglycerides, high levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL, \"bad\" cholesterol) or low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL, \"good\" cholesterol). These parameters in turn are believed to be risk indicators for some types of cardiovascular disease. These effects were observed in children too.\nSeveral meta-analyses (reviews and consolidations of multiple previously published experimental studies) have confirmed a significant relationship between saturated fat and high serum cholesterol levels, which in turn have been claimed to have a causal relation with increased risk of cardiovascular disease (the so-called lipid hypothesis). However, high cholesterol may be caused by many factors. Other indicators, such as high LDL/HDL ratio, have proved to be more predictive. In a study of myocardial infarction in 52 countries, the ApoB/ApoA1 (related to LDL and HDL, respectively) ratio was the strongest predictor of CVD among all risk factors. There are other pathways involving obesity, triglyceride levels, insulin sensitivity, endothelial function, and thrombogenicity, among others, that play a role in CVD, although it seems, in the absence of an adverse blood lipid profile, the other known risk factors have only a weak atherogenic effect. Different saturated fatty acids have differing effects on various lipid levels.\nCancer.\nThe evidence for a relation between saturated fat intake and cancer is significantly weaker, and there does not seem to be a clear medical consensus about it.\nBones.\nVarious animal studies have indicated that the intake of saturated fat has a negative effect on the mineral density of bones. One study suggested that men may be particularly vulnerable.\nDisposition and overall health.\nStudies have shown that substituting monounsaturated fatty acids for saturated ones is associated with increased daily physical activity and resting energy expenditure. More physical activity, less anger, and less irritability were associated with a higher-oleic acid diet than one of a palmitic acid diet.\nMonounsaturated vs. polyunsaturated fat.\nThe most common fatty acids in human diet are unsaturated or mono-unsaturated. Monounsaturated fats are found in animal flesh such as red meat, whole milk products, nuts, and high fat fruits such as olives and avocados. Olive oil is about 75% monounsaturated fat. The high oleic variety sunflower oil contains at least 70% monounsaturated fat. Canola oil and cashews are both about 58% monounsaturated fat. Tallow (beef fat) is about 50% monounsaturated fat, and lard is about 40% monounsaturated fat. Other sources include hazelnut, avocado oil, macadamia nut oil, grapeseed oil, groundnut oil (peanut oil), sesame oil, corn oil, popcorn, whole grain wheat, cereal, oatmeal, almond oil, hemp oil, and tea-oil camellia.\nPolyunsaturated fatty acids can be found mostly in nuts, seeds, fish, seed oils, and oysters.\nFood sources of polyunsaturated fats include:\nInsulin resistance (sensitivity).\nMUFAs (especially oleic acid) have been found to lower the incidence of insulin resistance; PUFAs (especially large amounts of arachidonic acid) and SFAs (such as arachidic acid) increased it. These ratios can be indexed in the phospholipids of human skeletal muscle and in other tissues as well. The relationship between dietary fats and insulin resistance is presumed secondary to the relationship between insulin resistance and inflammation, which is partially modulated by dietary fat ratios (omega\u22123/6/9), with both omega\u200d\u2013\u200d3 and \u200d\u2013\u200d9 thought to be anti-inflammatory and omega\u200d\u2013\u200d6 pro-inflammatory (as well as by numerous other dietary components, particularly polyphenols and exercise, with both of these anti-inflammatory). Although both pro- and anti-inflammatory types of fat are biologically necessary, fat dietary ratios in most U.S. diets are skewed towards omega\u200d\u2013\u200d6, with subsequent disinhibition of inflammation and potentiation of insulin resistance. This is contrary to the suggestion that polyunsaturated fats are shown to be protective against insulin resistance.\nThe large-scale KANWU study found that increasing MUFA and decreasing SFA intake could improve insulin sensitivity, but only when the overall fat intake of the diet was low. However, some MUFAs may promote insulin resistance (like the SFAs), whereas PUFAs may protect against it.\nCancer.\nLevels of oleic acid along with other MUFAs in red blood cell membranes were positively associated with breast cancer risk. The saturation index (SI) of the same membranes was inversely associated with breast cancer risk. MUFAs and low SI in erythrocyte membranes are predictors of postmenopausal breast cancer. Both of these variables depend on the activity of the enzyme delta-9 desaturase (\u03949-d).\nResults from observational clinical trials on PUFA intake and cancer have been inconsistent and vary by numerous factors of cancer incidence, including gender and genetic risk. Some studies have shown associations between higher intakes and/or blood levels of omega-3 PUFAs and a decreased risk of certain cancers, including breast and colorectal cancer, while other studies found no associations with cancer risk.\nPregnancy disorders.\nPolyunsaturated fat supplementation was found to have no effect on the incidence of pregnancy-related disorders, such as hypertension or preeclampsia, but may increase the length of gestation slightly and decreased the incidence of early premature births.\nExpert panels in the United States and Europe recommend that pregnant and lactating women consume higher amounts of polyunsaturated fats than the general population to enhance the DHA status of the fetus and newborn.\n\"Cis fat\" vs. \"trans fat\".\nIn nature, unsaturated fatty acids generally have double bonds in \"cis\" configuration (with the adjacent C\u2013C bonds on the same side) as opposed to \"trans\". Nevertheless, \"trans\" fatty acids (TFAs) occur in small amounts in meat and milk of ruminants (such as cattle and sheep), typically 2\u200d\u2013\u200d5% of total fat. Natural TFAs, which include conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) and vaccenic acid, originate in the rumen of these animals. CLA has two double bonds, one in the \"cis\" configuration and one in \"trans\", which makes it simultaneously a \"cis\"- and a \"trans\"-fatty acid.\nThe trans fat content in various natural and traditionally processed foods is shown in the table below.\nThe processing of fats by hydrogenation can convert some unsaturated fats into trans fats. The presence of trans fats in various processed foods has received much attention. \nOmega-three and omega-six fatty acids.\nThe \u03c9\u22123 fatty acids have received substantial attention. Among omega-3 fatty acids, neither long-chain nor short-chain forms were consistently associated with breast cancer risk. High levels of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), however, the most abundant omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid in erythrocyte (red blood cell) membranes, were associated with a reduced risk of breast cancer. The DHA obtained through the consumption of polyunsaturated fatty acids is positively associated with cognitive and behavioral performance. In addition, DHA is vital for the grey matter structure of the human brain, as well as retinal stimulation and neurotransmission.\nInteresterification.\nSome studies have investigated the health effects of interesterified (IE) fats, by comparing diets with IE and non-IE fats with the same overall fatty acid composition.\nSeveral experimental studies in humans found no statistical difference on fasting blood lipids between a diet with large amounts of IE fat, having 25-40% C16:0 or C18:0 on the 2-position, and a similar diet with non-IE fat, having only 3-9% C16:0 or C18:0 on the 2-position. A negative result was obtained also in a study that compared the effects on blood cholesterol levels of an IE fat product mimicking cocoa butter and the real non-IE product. Another study found tentative evidence that interesterified fat may lower cardiovascular disease risk.\nA 2007 study funded by the Malaysian Palm Oil Board claimed that replacing natural palm oil by other interesterified or partially hydrogenated fats caused adverse health effects, such as higher LDL/HDL ratio and plasma glucose levels. However, these effects could be attributed to the higher percentage of saturated acids in the IE and partially hydrogenated fats, rather than to the IE process itself.\nRancification.\nUnsaturated fats undergo auto-oxidation, which involves replacement of a C-H bond with C-OH unit. The process requires oxygen (air) and is accelerated by the presence of traces of metals, which serve as catalysts. Doubly unsaturated fatty acids are particularly prone to this reaction. Vegetable oils resist this process to a small degree because they contain antioxidants, such as tocopherol. Fats and oils often are treated with chelating agents such as citric acid to remove the metal catalysts.\nRole in disease.\nIn the human body, high levels of triglycerides in the bloodstream have been linked to atherosclerosis, heart disease\nand stroke. However, the relative negative impact of raised levels of triglycerides compared to that of LDL:HDL ratios is as yet unknown. The risk can be partly accounted for by a strong inverse relationship between triglyceride level and HDL-cholesterol level. But the risk is also due to high triglyceride levels increasing the quantity of small, dense LDL particles.\nGuidelines.\nThe National Cholesterol Education Program has set guidelines for triglyceride levels:\nThese levels are tested after fasting for 8 to 12 hours. Triglyceride levels remain temporarily higher for a period after eating.\nThe AHA recommends an optimal triglyceride level of 100mg/dL (1.1mmol/L) or lower to improve heart health."}
{"id": "11043", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11043", "title": "Front line", "text": "Position closest to the area of conflict\nA front line (alternatively front-line or frontline) in military terminology is the position(s) closest to the area of conflict of an armed force's personnel and equipment, usually referring to land forces. When a front (an intentional or unintentional boundary) between opposing sides forms, the front line is the area where each side's forces are engaged in conflict. Leaders have often fought at the front lines either purposefully or due to a collapse in battle formation. While a calculated risk, fighting on the front has in instances reduced communication and heightened morale. The front is in direct contrast to the rear, which is the position furthest from conflict.\nAll branches of the United States Armed Forces use the related technical terms, Forward Line of Own Troops (FLOT) and Forward Edge of Battle Area (FEBA). These terms are used as battlespace control measures that designate the forward-most friendly maritime or land forces on the battlefield at a given point in time during an armed conflict. FLOT/FEBA may include covering and screening forces. The Forward Line of Enemy Troops (FLET) is the FEBA from the enemy's perspective.\nEtymology.\nAlthough the term \"front line\" first appeared in the 1520s, it took until 1842 for it to be used in the military sense. Its first use as an adjective was from 1915.\nThe word \"front\" gained the military sense of \"foremost part of an army\" in the mid-14th century, which, in turn, led the word to take on the meaning \"field of operations in contact with the enemy\" in the 1660s. That sense led to the phrase home front, which first appeared in 1919. In a non-combat situation or when a combat situation is not assumed, front can mean the direction in which the command is faced.\nThe attributive adjective version of the term front line (as in \"our front-line personnel\") describes materiel or personnel intended for or actively in forward use: at sea, on land or in the air: \"at\" the front line.\nEvolution of the concept.\nIn the land campaigns of World War I, FEBAs, FLOTs and FLETs could often be identified by eye. For example, in France and Belgium, they were defined by opposing defensive trench systems.\nTypical modern conflicts are vastly different, characterised by \"war amongst the people\", the concept of a \"Three Block War\", and the presence of an asymmetric threat from irregular or terrorist combatants. In those cases, the concepts of front line, FEBA, FLOT and FLET may be of little relevance. The term \"front line\" has come to refer more to any place where bullets and bombs are flying or are likely to fly.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11049", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11049", "title": "FIFA", "text": "International governing body of association football\nF\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) (lit.\u2009'International Federation of Association Football') is an international self-regulatory governing body of association football, beach football, and futsal. It was founded on 21 May 1904 to oversee international competition among the national associations of Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. Headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, its membership now comprises 211 national associations. These national associations must also be members of one of the six regional confederations: CAF (Africa), AFC (Asia), UEFA (Europe), CONCACAF (North &amp; Central America and the Caribbean), OFC (Oceania), and CONMEBOL (South America).\nFIFA is a sports governing body that organizes football events all over the world. FIFA outlines several objectives in its organizational statutes, including growing football internationally, ensuring it is accessible to everyone, and advocating for integrity and fair play. It is responsible for organizing and promoting football's major international tournaments, notably the World Cup which began in 1930, and the Women's World Cup which commenced in 1991. Although FIFA does not solely set the laws of the game, that being the responsibility of the International Football Association Board of which FIFA is a member, it applies and enforces the rules across all FIFA competitions. All FIFA tournaments generate revenue from sponsorships; in 2022, FIFA had revenues of over US$5.8 billion, ending the 2019\u20132022 cycle with a net positive of $1.2 billion, and cash reserves of over $3.9 billion.\nReports by investigative journalists have linked FIFA leadership with corruption, bribery, and vote-rigging related to the election of FIFA president Sepp Blatter and the organization's decision to award the 2018 and 2022 World Cups to Russia and Qatar, respectively. These allegations led to the indictments of nine high-ranking FIFA officials and five corporate executives by the US Department of Justice on charges including racketeering, wire fraud, and money laundering. On 27 May 2015, several of these officials were arrested by Swiss authorities, who launched a simultaneous but separate criminal investigation into how the organization awarded the 2018 and 2022 World Cups. Those among these officials who were also indicted in the US are expected to be extradited to face charges there as well.\nMany officials were suspended by FIFA's ethics committee including Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini. In early 2017, reports became public about FIFA president Gianni Infantino attempting to prevent the re-elections of both chairmen of the ethics committee, Cornel Borb\u00e9ly and Hans-Joachim Eckert, during the FIFA congress in May 2017. On 9 May 2017, following Infantino's proposal, the FIFA Council decided not to renew the mandates of Borb\u00e9ly and Eckert. Together with the chairmen, 11 of 13 committee members were removed. FIFA has been suspected of corruption regarding the Qatar 2022 FIFA World Cup bid.\nHistory.\nThe need for a single body to oversee association football became increasingly apparent at the beginning of the 20th century with the increasing popularity of international fixtures. The F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) was founded in the rear of the headquarters of the Union des Soci\u00e9t\u00e9s Fran\u00e7aises de Sports Athl\u00e9tiques (USFSA) at the Rue Saint Honor\u00e9 229 in Paris on 21 May 1904. The French name and acronym are universally adopted outside French-speaking countries. The founding members were the national associations of Belgium, Denmark, France, the Netherlands, Spain (represented by then-Real Madrid CF; the Royal Spanish Football Federation was not created until 1913), Sweden and Switzerland.\nOn the same day, the German Football Association (DFB) declared its intention to affiliate through a telegram.\nThe first president of FIFA was Robert Gu\u00e9rin. Gu\u00e9rin was replaced in 1906 by Daniel Burley Woolfall from England, by then a member of the association. The first tournament FIFA staged, the association football competition for the 1908 Olympics in London was more successful than its Olympic predecessors, despite the presence of professional footballers, contrary to the founding principles of FIFA.\nMembership of FIFA expanded beyond Europe with the application of South Africa in 1909, Argentina in 1912, Canada and Chile in 1913, and the United States in 1914.\nThe 1912 Spalding Athletic Library \"Official Guide\" includes information on the 1912 Olympics (scores and stories), AAFA, and FIFA. The 1912 FIFA president was Dan B Woolfall. Daniel Burley Woolfall was president from 1906 to 1918.\nDuring World War I, with many players sent off to war and the possibility of travel for international fixtures severely limited, the organization's survival was in doubt. Post-war, following the death of Woolfall, the organization was run by Dutchman Carl Hirschmann. It was saved from extinction but at the cost of the withdrawal of the Home Nations (of the United Kingdom), who cited an unwillingness to participate in international competitions with their World War enemies. The Home Nations later resumed their membership. The FIFA collection is held by the National Football Museum at Urbis in Manchester, England. The first World Cup was held in 1930 in Montevideo, Uruguay.\nIdentity.\nFlag.\nThe FIFA flag is blue, with the organization's wordmark logo in the middle. The current FIFA flag was first flown during the 2018 FIFA World Cup opening ceremony in Moscow, Russia.\nAnthem.\nAkin to the UEFA Champions League, FIFA has adopted an anthem composed by the German composer Franz Lambert since the 1994 FIFA World Cup. It has been re-arranged and produced by Rob May and Simon Hill. The FIFA Anthem is played at the beginning of official FIFA sanctioned matches and tournaments such as international friendlies, the FIFA World Cup, FIFA Women's World Cup, FIFA U-20 World Cup, FIFA U-17 World Cup, Football at the Summer Olympics, FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup, FIFA Women's U-17 World Cup, FIFA Futsal World Cup, FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup and FIFA Club World Cup.\nSince 2007, FIFA has also required most of its broadcast partners to use short sequences including the anthem at the beginning and end of FIFA event coverage and for break bumpers to help promote FIFA's sponsors. This emulates practices long used by international football events, such as the UEFA Champions League. Exceptions may be made for specific circumstances; for example, an original piece of African music was used for bumpers during the 2010 FIFA World Cup.\nStructure.\nSix confederations and 222 national associations.\nBesides its worldwide institutions, there are six confederations recognized by FIFA which oversee the game in the different continents and regions of the world. National associations, and not the continental confederations, are members of FIFA. The continental confederations are provided for in FIFA's statutes, and membership of a union is a prerequisite to FIFA membership.\nIn total, FIFA recognizes 211 national associations and their associated men's national teams as well as 129 women's national teams; see the list of national football teams and their respective country codes. The number of FIFA member associations is higher than the number of UN member states as FIFA has admitted associations from 23 non-sovereign entities as members in their own right, such as the four Home Nations within the United Kingdom and the two special administrative regions of China: Hong Kong and Macau.\nOn 28 February 2022, FIFA suspended Russia from all competitions due to controversy surrounding Russia's invasion of Ukraine.\nFIFA can suspend countries due to numerous multifaceted issues. Common reasons include governance interference, corruption, and financial irregularities. Doping or the misappropriation of drugs is also a consideration for expulsion.\nThe FIFA Men's World Rankings are updated monthly and rank each team based on their performance in international competitions, qualifiers, and friendly matches. There is also a world ranking for women's football, amended on a quarterly schedule.\nLaws and governance.\nFIFA's headquarters is in Z\u00fcrich, and it is an association established under the law of Switzerland.\nFIFA's supreme body is the FIFA Congress, an assembly of representatives from each affiliated member association. Each national football association has one vote, regardless of size or footballing strength. The Congress assembles in ordinary sessions once every year, and extraordinary sessions have been held once a year since 1998. Congress makes decisions relating to FIFA's governing statutes and their method of implementation and application. Only Congress can pass changes to FIFA's statutes. The congress approves the annual report and decides on the acceptance of new national associations, and holds elections. Congress elects the President of FIFA, its general secretary, and the other members of the FIFA Council in the year following the FIFA World Cup.\nThe FIFA Council \u2013 formerly called the FIFA Executive Committee \u2013 is the organization's main strategic body, making decisions in the intervals between Congress meetings. The council comprises 37 people: the president, who chairs the Council; 8 vice-presidents; and 28 members from the confederations. Each confederation must elect at least one woman to the Council. Six of the Vice-Presidents hold the role \"ex officio\" as the Presidents of the Confederations, and the remaining two must come from UEFA. The Council reviews the bids to host the World Cup and proposes up to three of these to the Congress, which votes to select the host country or countries.\nThe President and the Secretary General are the main office holders of FIFA and are in charge of its daily administration, carried in by the general secretariat, with its staff of approximately 280 members. Gianni Infantino is the current president, elected on 26 February 2016 at an extraordinary FIFA Congress session after former president Sepp Blatter was suspended pending a corruption investigation.\nFIFA's worldwide organizational structure also consists of several other bodies under the authority of the FIFA Council or created by Congress as standing committees. Among those bodies are the FIFA Emergency Committee, the FIFA Ethics Committee, the Finance Committee, the Disciplinary Committee, and the Referees Committee.\nThe FIFA Emergency Committee deals with all matters requiring immediate settlement in the time frame between the regular meetings of the FIFA Council. The Emergency Committee consists of the FIFA president as well as one member from each confederation. Emergency Committee decisions made are immediately put into legal effect, although they need to be ratified at the next Executive Committee meeting.\nAdministrative cost.\nFIFA publishes its results according to International Financial Reporting Standards. The total compensation for the management committee in 2011 was 30 million for 35 people. Blatter, the only full-time person on the committee, earned approximately two million Swiss francs, 1.2 million in salary, and the rest in bonuses. A report in London's \"The Sunday Times\" in June 2014 said the members of the committee had their salaries doubled from $100,000 to $200,000 during the year. The report also said leaked documents had indicated $4.4 million in secret bonuses had been paid to the committee members following the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.\nGovernance.\nThe laws that govern football known officially as the Laws of the Game, are not solely the responsibility of FIFA; they are maintained by a body called the International Football Association Board (IFAB). FIFA has members on its board (four representatives); the other four are provided by the football associations of the United Kingdom: England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland, who jointly established IFAB in 1882 and are recognized for the creation and history of the game. Changes to the Laws of the Game must be agreed upon by at least six delegates.\nThe FIFA Statutes form the overarching document guiding FIFA's governing system. The governing system is divided into separate bodies with the appropriate powers to create a system of checks and balances. It consists of four general bodies: the Congress, the executive committee, the general Secretariat, and standing and ad hoc committees.\nDiscipline of national associations.\nFIFA frequently takes active roles in the running of the sport and developing the game around the world. One of its sanctions is to suspend teams and associated members from international competition when a government interferes in the running of FIFA's associate member organizations or if the associate is not functioning correctly.\nA 2007 FIFA ruling that a player can be registered with a maximum of three clubs and appear in official matches for a maximum of two in a year measured from 1 July to 30 June has led to controversy, especially in those countries whose seasons cross that date barrier, as in the case of two former Ireland internationals. As a direct result of this controversy, FIFA modified this ruling the following year to accommodate transfers between leagues with out-of-phase seasons.\nVideo replay and goal-line technology.\nFIFA now permits the use of video evidence during matches, as well as for subsequent sanctions. However, for most of FIFA's history it stood opposed to its use. The 1970 meeting of the International Football Association Board \"agreed to request the television authorities to refrain from any slow-motion play-back which reflected, or might reflect, adversely on any decision of the referee\". As recently as 2008 FIFA president Sepp Blatter said: \"Let it be as it is and let's leave [football] with errors. The television companies will have the right to say [the referee] was right or wrong, but still, the referee makes the decision \u2013 a man, not a machine.\" This stance was finally overturned on 3 March 2018, when the IFAB wrote video assistant referees (also known as VARs) into the Laws of the Game permanently. Their use remains optional for competitions.\nIn early July 2012 FIFA sanctioned the use of goal-line technology, subject to rules specified by the International Football Association Board (IFAB), who had officially approved its use by amending the Laws of the Game to permit (but not require) its use. This followed a high-profile incident during a second-round game in the 2010 FIFA World Cup between England and Germany, where a shot by Englishman Frank Lampard, which would have levelled the scores at 2\u20132 in a match that ultimately ended in a 4\u20131 German victory, crossed the line but was not seen to do so by the match officials, which led FIFA officials to declare that they would re-examine the use of goal-line technology.\nControversy.\nThe 2015 FIFA corruption scandal exposed a widespread bribery and corruption scheme within FIFA. This scandal implicated over two dozen FIFA officials and associates in a 24-year self-enrichment scheme that reached the highest levels of FIFA management. Accusations included bribery related to the awarding of hosting rights for the 2018 World Cup to Russia and the 2022 World Cup to Qatar. On 27 May 2015, the U.S. Department of Justice indicted 14 FIFA officials and marketing executives, charging them with receiving approximately $150 million in bribes over two decades. The scandal led to the arrest of several high-ranking FIFA officials, including vice presidents Jeffrey Webb and Eugenio Figueredo. Although FIFA president Sepp Blatter was not initially named in the criminal investigation, he resigned shortly after being re-elected for a fifth term.\nFurther investigations uncovered additional corruption, resulting in suspensions and bans for several FIFA executives, including Blatter, Michel Platini, and J\u00e9r\u00f4me Valcke. The scandal highlighted an organizational culture within FIFA characterized by greed, secrecy, and corruption, severely damaging its reputation and prompting widespread calls for significant reforms in the governance of international football.\nOn 28 February 2022, due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and by a recommendation by the International Olympic Committee (IOC), FIFA suspended the participation of Russia. The Russian Football Union unsuccessfully appealed the FIFA ban to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, which upheld the ban. Some observers, while approving of the boycott of Russia, have pointed out that FIFA did not boycott Saddam Hussein's Iraq as an aggressor during the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Saudi Arabia for its military intervention in Yemen, Qatar for its human rights violations, or the United States for the actions of the US military during the Iraq War.\nFIFA previously banned Indonesia due to government intervention within the team. FIFA requires members to play \"with no influence from third parties\".\nOn 23 October 2024, a new controversy came up as allegations against FIFA were made by players from several countries claiming the organization did not pay them agreed sums of money. The total reaching with sums reaching up to \u00a33m. According to reports Four hundred and twenty players did not get paid as agreed with FIFA.\nRecognition and awards.\nFIFA holds an annual awards ceremony, The Best FIFA Football Awards since 2016, which recognizes both individual and team achievements in international association football. Individually, the top men's player is awarded The Best FIFA Men's Player, and the top women's player is The Best FIFA Women's Player. Other prominent awards are The Best FIFA Football Coach and FIFA FIFPRO World 11.\nFIFA presents many other awards each year, including the Ballon d'Or (which is jointly presented with the France Football Association), given to the best and most popular player. The FIFA Pusk\u00e1s Award honors the most beautiful goal of the year, while the Golden Glove is awarded to the top-performing goalkeeper at each World Cup\u2014most recently won by Emiliano Mart\u00ednez of Argentina in 2022. Other notable awards include The FIFA Team of The Year, FIFA Player of The Century, The Golden Boy award.\nIn 2000, FIFA presented two awards, FIFA Club of the Century and FIFA Player of the Century, to decide the greatest football club and player of the 20th century. Real Madrid was the club winner, while Diego Maradona and Pel\u00e9 were the joint player's winners.\nTournaments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFIFA World Rankings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \"As of October 2024\"\nFIFA+.\nIn April 2022 FIFA launched FIFA+, an OTT service providing up to 40,000 live matches per year, including 11,000 women's matches. It was also confirmed that FIFA would make available archival content, including every FIFA World Cup and FIFA Women's World Cup match recorded on camera, together with original documentary content. Eleven Sports was later reported to be responsible for populating the FIFA+ platform with live matches.\nFIFA+ broadcast all matches of the youth World Cups in both genders, starting with the 2023 FIFA U-20 World Cup. FIFA+ also showed the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup live in selected regions such as Japan, Brazil, Indonesia, and Thailand.\nFIFA+ have the rights to competitions in Oceania including the OFC Champions League and the OFC Women's Olympic Qualifying Tournament. They also have rights to the New Zealand domestic competitions and national teams.\nCompetitions.\nAs of 16 May 2025 FIFA+ covers the following competitions:\nNational.\nOnly On: \nCorruption.\nIn May 2006, British investigative reporter Andrew Jennings' book \"Foul! The Secret World of FIFA: Bribes, Vote-Rigging, and Ticket Scandals\" (HarperCollins) caused controversy within the football world by detailing an alleged international cash-for-contracts scandal following the collapse of FIFA's marketing partner International Sport and Leisure (ISL) and revealed how some football officials had been urged to secretly repay the sweeteners they received. The book also alleged that vote-rigging had occurred in the fight for Sepp Blatter's continued control of FIFA as the organization's president. Shortly after the release of \"Foul!\" a BBC \"Panorama\" expos\u00e9 by Jennings and BBC producer Roger Corke, screened on 11 June 2006, reported that Blatter was being investigated by Swiss police over his role in a secret deal to repay more than \u00a31m worth of bribes pocketed by football officials. Lord Triesman, the former chairman of the English Football Association, described FIFA as an organization that \"behaves like a mafia family,\" highlighting the organization's \"decades-long traditions of bribes, bungs, and corruption\".\nAll testimonies offered in the \"Panorama\" expos\u00e9 were provided through a disguised voice, appearance, or both, save one: Mel Brennan, a former CONCACAF official, became the first high-level football insider to go public with substantial allegations of corruption, nonfeasance, and malfeasance by CONCACAF and FIFA leadership. Brennan\u2014the highest-level African-American in the history of world football governance\u2014joined Jennings, Trinidadian journalist Lisana Liburd, and many others in exposing allegedly inappropriate allocations of money by CONCACAF and drew connections between ostensible CONCACAF criminality and similar behaviours at FIFA. Since then, and in the light of fresh allegations of corruption by FIFA in late 2010, both Jennings and Brennan remain highly critical of FIFA. Brennan has called directly for an alternative to FIFA to be considered by the stakeholders of the sport worldwide.\nIn a further \"Panorama\" expos\u00e9 broadcast on 29 November 2010, Jennings alleged that three senior FIFA officials, Nicolas Leoz, Issa Hayatou and Ricardo Teixeira, had been paid huge bribes by ISL between 1989 and 1999, which FIFA had failed to investigate. Jennings claimed they appeared on a list of 175 bribes paid by ISL, totalling about $100 million. A former ISL executive said there were suspicions within the company that they were only awarded the marketing contract for successive World Cups by paying bribes to FIFA officials. The program also alleged that another current official, Jack Warner, has been repeatedly involved in reselling World Cup tickets to touts; Blatter said that FIFA had not investigated the allegation because it had not been told about it via 'official channels.'\n\"Panorama\" also alleged that FIFA requires nations bidding to host the World Cup to agree to implement special laws, including a blanket tax exemption for FIFA and its corporate sponsors and limitation of workers rights. Contrary to FIFA's demands, these conditions were revealed by the Dutch government, resulting in them being told by FIFA that their bid could be adversely affected. Following Jennings' earlier investigations, he was banned from all FIFA press conferences for reasons he claimed had not been made clear. The accused officials failed to answer questions about his latest allegations verbally or by letter.\nPrime Minister David Cameron and Andy Anson, head of England's World Cup bid, criticized the timing of the broadcast three days before FIFA decided on the host for the 2018 FIFA World Cup, because it might damage England's bid; the voters included officials accused by the program.\nIn June 2011, it came to light that the International Olympic Committee had started inquiry proceedings against FIFA honorary president Jo\u00e3o Havelange into claims of bribery. \"Panorama\" alleged that Havelange accepted a $1\u00a0million 'bung' in 1997 from ISL. The IOC stated that it \"takes all allegations of corruption very seriously, and we would always ask for any evidence of wrongdoing involving any IOC members to be passed to our ethics commission\".\nIn a 2014 interview, American sportswriter Dave Zirin said that corruption is endemic to FIFA leadership and that the organization should be abolished for the game's good. He said that currently, FIFA is in charge of both monitoring corruption in association football matches and marketing and selling the sport, but that two \"separate\" organizational bodies are needed: an organizational body that monitors corruption and match-fixing and the like and an organization that's responsible for marketing and sponsorships and selling the sport. Zirin said the idea of having a single organization responsible for both seems highly ineffective and detrimental to the sport.\nIn May 2015, 14 people were arrested, including nine FIFA officials, after being accused of corruption.\nIn the 2022 World Cup bid, Qatar was honoured to host the World Cup. Since then it has been discovered that Qatar paid as much as $200 billion to host the World Cup. This information was discovered by the Tass news agency in Russia.\nGuilty pleas.\nBetween 2013 and 2015 four individuals, and two sports television rights corporations pleaded guilty to United States financial misconduct charges. The pleas of Chuck Blazer, Jos\u00e9 Hawilla, Daryan Warner, Darrell Warner, Traffic Group and Traffic Sports USA were unsealed in May 2015. In another 2015 case, Singapore also imposed a 6-year \"harshest sentence ever received for match-fixing\" on match-fixer Eric Ding who had bribed three Lebanese FIFA football officials with prostitutes as an inducement to fix future matches that they would officiate, as well as perverting the course of justice.\nIndictments and arrests.\nFourteen FIFA officials and marketing executives were indicted by the United States Department of Justice in May 2015. The officials were arrested in Switzerland and are in the process of extradition to the US. Specific charges (brought under the RICO act) include wire fraud, racketeering, and money laundering.\n\"Swiss authorities say they have also opened a separate criminal investigation into FIFA's operations pertaining to the 2018 and 2022 World Cup bids\".\nFIFA's top officials were arrested at a hotel in Switzerland on suspicion of receiving bribes totalling $100m (\u00a365m). The US Department of Justice stated that nine FIFA officials and four executives of sports management companies were arrested and accused of over $150m in bribes. The UK Shadow Home Secretary and Labour Member of Parliament, Andy Burnham, stated in May 2015 that England should boycott the 2018 World Cup against corruption in FIFA and military aggression by Russia.\n2018 and 2022 World Cup bids.\nFIFA's choice to award the 2018 World Cup to Russia and the 2022 World Cup to Qatar has been widely criticized by media. It has been alleged that some FIFA inside sources insist that the Russian kickbacks of cash and gifts given to FIFA executive members were enough to secure the Russian 2018 bid weeks before the result was announced. Sepp Blatter was widely criticized in the media for giving a warning about the \"evils of the media\" in a speech to FIFA executive committee members shortly before they voted on the hosting of the 2018 World Cup, a reference to \"The Sunday Times\" expos\u00e9s, and the \"Panorama\" investigation.\nTwo members of FIFA's executive committee were banned from all football-related activity in November 2010 for allegedly offering to sell their votes to undercover newspaper reporters. In early May 2011, a British parliamentary inquiry into why England failed to secure the 2018 finals was told by a member of parliament, Damian Collins, that there was evidence from \"The Sunday Times\" newspaper that Issa Hayatou of Cameroon and Jacques Anouma of Ivory Coast were paid by Qatar. Qatar has categorically denied the allegations, as have Hayatou and Anouma.\nFIFA president Blatter said, as of 2011[ [update]], that the British newspaper \"The Sunday Times\" has agreed to bring its whistle-blowing source to meet senior FIFA officials, who will decide whether to order a new investigation into alleged World Cup bidding corruption. \"[The \"Sunday Times\"] are happy, they agreed that they will bring this whistleblower here to Z\u00fcrich and then we will have a discussion, an investigation of this\", Blatter said.\nSpecifically, the whistle-blower claims that FIFA executive committee members Issa Hayatou and Jacques Anouma were paid $1.5\u00a0million to vote for Qatar. The emirate's bid beat the United States in a final round of voting last December. Blatter did not rule out reopening the 2022 vote if corruption could be proved, but urged taking the matter \"step by step\". The FIFA president said his organization is \"anxiously awaiting\" more evidence before asking its ethics committee to examine allegations made in Britain's Parliament in early May 2011.\nHayatou, who is from Cameroon, leads the Confederation of African Football and is a FIFA vice-president. Anouma is president of Ivorian Football Federation. The whistle-blower said Qatar agreed to pay a third African voter, Amos Adamu, for his support. The Nigerian was later suspended from voting after a FIFA ethics court ruled he solicited bribes from undercover Sunday Times reporters posing as lobbyists. Blatter said the newspaper and its whistle-blower would meet with FIFA secretary general, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Valcke, and legal director, Marco Villiger.\nAllegations against FIFA officials have also been made to the UK Parliament by David Triesman, the former head of England's bid and the English Football Association. Triesman told the lawmakers that four long-standing FIFA executive committee members\u2014Jack Warner, Nicol\u00e1s Leoz, Ricardo Teixeira and Worawi Makudi\u2014engaged in \"improper and unethical\" conduct in the 2018 bidding, which was won by Russia. All six FIFA voters have denied wrongdoing.\nOn 28 September 2015, Sepp Blatter suggested that the 2018 World Cup being awarded to Russia was planned before the voting, and that the 2022 World Cup would have then been awarded to the United States. However, this plan changed after the election ballot, and the 2022 World Cup was awarded to Qatar instead of the US.\nAccording to leaked documents seen by \"The Sunday Times\", Qatari state-run television channel Al Jazeera secretly offered $400\u00a0million to FIFA, for broadcasting rights, just 21 days before FIFA announced that Qatar would hold the 2022 World Cup.\nOn 17 July 2012, in the wake of announced anti-corruption reforms by Sepp Blatter, the president of the FIFA, the organization appointed US lawyer Michael J. Garcia as the chairman of the investigative chamber of FIFA Ethics Committee, while German judge Hans-Joachim Eckert was appointed as the chairman of the Ethics Committee's adjudication chamber.\nIn August 2012, Garcia declared his intention to investigate the bidding process and decision to respectively award the right to host the 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cup to Russia and Qatar by the FIFA Executive Committee. Garcia delivered his subsequent 350-page report in September 2014, and Eckert then announced that it would not be made public for legal reasons.\nOn 13 November 2014, Eckert released a 42-page summary of his findings after reviewing Garcia's report. The summary cleared both Russia and Qatar of any wrongdoing during the bidding for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups, leaving Russia and Qatar free to stage their respective World Cups.\nFIFA welcomed \"the fact that a degree of closure has been reached\", while the Associated Press wrote that the Eckert summary \"was denounced by critics as a whitewash\". Hours after the Eckert summary was released, Garcia himself criticized it for being \"materially incomplete\" with \"erroneous representations of the facts and conclusions\", while declaring his intention to appeal to FIFA's Appeal Committee. On 16 December 2014, FIFA's Appeal Committee dismissed Garcia's appeal against the Eckert summary as \"not admissible\". FIFA also stated that Eckert's summary was \"neither legally binding nor appealable\". A day later, Garcia resigned from his role as FIFA ethics investigator in protest of FIFA's conduct, citing a \"lack of leadership\" and lost confidence in the independence of Eckert from FIFA. In June 2015, Swiss authorities claimed the report was of \"little value\".\nIn November 2022, the FIFA officials told players not to get involved in politics but focus on sports when they are in Qatar. A few weeks earlier, the football associations and players of Denmark and Australia criticized Qatar for this.\n2011 FIFA presidential election.\nFIFA announced on 25 May 2011 that it had opened the investigation to examine the conduct of four officials\u2014Mohamed Bin Hammam and Jack Warner, along with Caribbean Football Union (CFU) officials Debbie Minguell and Jason Sylvester\u2014in relation to claims made by executive committee member, Chuck Blazer. Blazer, who was at the time, the general secretary of the CONCACAF confederation, has alleged that violations were committed under the FIFA code of ethics during a meeting organized by Bin Hammam and Warner on 10 and 11 May\u2014the same time Lord Triesman had accused Warner of demanding money for a World Cup 2018 vote\u2014in relation to the 2011 FIFA presidential election, in which Bin Hammam, who also played a key role in the Qatar 2022 FIFA World Cup bid, allegedly offered financial incentives for votes cast in his favour during the presidential election.\nAs a result of the investigation both Bin Hammam and Warner were suspended. Warner reacted to his suspension by questioning Blatter's conduct and adding that FIFA secretary general, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Valcke, had told him via e-mail that Qatar had bought the 2022 World Cup. Valcke subsequently issued a statement denying he had suggested it was bribery, saying instead that the country had \"used its financial muscle to lobby for support\". Qatar officials denied any impropriety. Bin Hammam also responded by writing to FIFA, protesting unfair treatment in suspension by the FIFA Ethics Committee and FIFA administration.\nFurther evidence emerged of alleged corruption. On 30 May 2011, Fred Lunn, vice-president of the Bahamas Football Association, said that he was given $40,000 in cash as an incitement to vote for FIFA presidential candidate, Mohamed bin Hammam. In addition, on 11 June 2011 Louis Giskus, president of the Surinamese Football Association, alleged that he was given $40,000 in cash for \"development projects\" as an incentive to vote for Bin Hammam.\nResponse to allegations.\nAfter being re-elected as president of FIFA, Sepp Blatter responded to the allegations by promising to reform FIFA in wake of the bribery scandal, with Danny Jordaan, CEO of the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa, saying there is great expectation for reform. Former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger is being tipped for a role on the newly proposed 'Solutions Committee', and former Netherlands national football team player Johan Cruyff was also being linked with a role.\nUEFA secretary-general Gianni Infantino said he hopes for \"concrete\" measures to be taken by the world game's authority. Saying that \"the UEFA executive committee has taken note of the will of FIFA to take concrete and effective measures for good governance ... [and is] following the situation closely.\"\nIOC president Jacques Rogge commented on the situation by saying that he believes FIFA \"can emerge stronger\" from its worst-ever crisis, stating that \"I will not point a finger and lecture ... I am sure FIFA can emerge stronger and from within\".\nSeveral of FIFA's partners and sponsors have raised concerns about the allegations of corruption, including Coca-Cola, Adidas, Emirates and Visa. Coca-Cola raised concerns by saying \"the current allegations being raised are distressing and bad for the sport\"; with Adidas saying \"the negative tenor of the public debate around Fifa at the moment is neither good for football nor for Fifa and its partners\"; moreover Emirates raised its concerns by saying \"we hope that these issues will be resolved as soon as possible\"; and Visa adding \"the current situation is clearly not good for the game and we ask that Fifa take all necessary steps to resolve the concerns that have been raised.\"\nAustralian Sports Minister Mark Arbib said it was clear FIFA needed to change, saying \"there is no doubt there needs to be reform of FIFA. This is something that we're hearing worldwide\", with Australian Senator Nick Xenophon accusing FIFA of \"scamming\" the country out of the A$46\u00a0million (US$35\u00a0million) it spent on the Australia 2022 FIFA World Cup bid, saying that \"until the investigation into FIFA has been completed, Australia must hold off spending any more taxpayers' money on any future World Cup bids.\"\nTheo Zwanziger, president of the German Football Association, also called on FIFA to re-examine the awarding of the 2022 World Cup to Qatar.\nTransparency International, which had called on FIFA to postpone the election pending a full independent investigation, renewed its call on FIFA to change its governance structure.\nMoreover, former Argentine football player Diego Maradona was critical of FIFA in light of the corruption scandal, comparing members of the board to dinosaurs. He said \"Fifa is a big museum. They are dinosaurs who do not want to relinquish power. It's always going to be the same.\" In October 2011, Dick Pound criticized the organization, saying, \"FIFA has fallen far short of a credible demonstration that it recognizes the many problems it faces, that it has the will to solve them, that it is willing to be transparent about what it is doing and what it finds, and that its conduct in the future will be such that the public can be confident in the governance of the sport.\"\n2018 revision of code of ethics.\nIn 2018, FIFA revised its code of ethics to remove corruption as one of the enumerated bases of ethical violations. It retained bribery, misappropriation of funds and manipulation of competitions as offences, but added a statute of limitation clause that those offences could not be pursued after a ten-year period.\nThe revision also made it an offence to make public statements of a defamatory nature against FIFA. Alexandra Wrage, a former member of the FIFA governance committee and an expert in anti-bribery compliance, said that of the revision that \"the real value to FIFA is the chilling effect this will have on critics\".\nIn October 2024 more than 100 female footballers sent an open letter to FIFA demanding the organization to end its sponsor deal with Saudi oil company Aramco, due to the continuous human rights violations, women's rights abuses and criminalisation of homosexuality in Saudi Arabia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11052", "revid": "50079837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11052", "title": "List of presidents of FIFA", "text": "The following is a list of presidents of FIFA, the world association football governing body.\nPresidents Daniel Burley Woolfall, Rodolphe Seeldrayers, and Arthur Drewry died during their term in office.\nThe current president is Swiss-Italian Gianni Infantino, elected on 26 February 2016 during an extraordinary session of the FIFA Congress. Prior to his election, Cameroonian Issa Hayatou was acting president after the impeachment of Sepp Blatter on 8 October 2015, who was given an eight-year ban from all football-related activities on 21 December 2015 (reduced to six years on 24 February 2016), which was renewed for six years on 24 March 2021.\nPresidents of FIFA.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11053", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11053", "title": "Frontline tv series", "text": ""}
