{"id": "18878", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18878", "title": "Monopoly", "text": "Market structure with a single firm dominating the market\nA monopoly (from Greek and ) is a market in which one person or company is the only supplier of a particular good or service. A monopoly is characterized by a lack of economic competition to produce a particular thing, a lack of viable substitute goods, and the possibility of a high monopoly price well above the seller's marginal cost that leads to a high monopoly profit. The verb \"monopolise\" or \"monopolize\" refers to the \"process\" by which a company gains the ability to raise prices or exclude competitors. In economics, a monopoly is a single seller. In law, a monopoly is a business entity that has significant market power, that is, the power to charge overly high prices, which is associated with unfair price raises. Although monopolies may be big businesses, size is not a characteristic of a monopoly. A small business may still have the power to raise prices in a small industry (or market).\nA monopoly may also have monopsony control of a sector of a market. A monopsony is a market situation in which there is only one buyer. Likewise, a monopoly should be distinguished from a cartel (a form of oligopoly), in which several providers act together to coordinate services, prices or sale of goods. Monopolies, monopsonies and oligopolies are all situations in which one or a few entities have market power and therefore interact with their customers (monopoly or oligopoly), or suppliers (monopsony) in ways that distort the market.\nMonopolies can be formed by mergers and integrations, form naturally, or be established by a government. In many jurisdictions, competition laws restrict monopolies due to government concerns over potential adverse effects. Holding a dominant position or a monopoly in a market is often not illegal in itself; however, certain categories of behavior can be considered abusive and therefore incur legal sanctions when business is dominant. A government-granted monopoly or \"legal monopoly\", by contrast, is sanctioned by the state, often to provide an incentive to invest in a risky venture or enrich a domestic interest group. Patents, copyrights, and trademarks are sometimes used as examples of government-granted monopolies. The government may also reserve the venture for itself, thus forming a government monopoly, for example with a state-owned company.\nMonopolies may be naturally occurring due to limited competition because the industry is resource intensive and requires substantial costs to operate (e.g., certain railroad systems).\nMarket structures.\nMarket structure is determined by the following factors:\nIn economics, the idea of monopolies is important in the study of management structures, which directly concerns normative aspects of economic competition, and provides the basis for topics such as industrial organization and economics of regulation. There are four basic types of market structures in traditional economic analysis: perfect competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly, and monopoly. A monopoly is a structure in which a single supplier produces and sells a given product or service. If there is a single seller in a certain market and there are no close substitutes for the product, then the market structure is that of a \"pure monopoly\". Sometimes, there are many sellers in an industry or there exist many close substitutes for the goods being produced, but nevertheless, companies retain some market power. This is termed \"monopolistic competition\", whereas in an oligopoly, the companies interact strategically.\nIn general, the main results from this theory compare the price-fixing methods across market structures, analyze the effect of a certain structure on welfare, and vary technological or demand assumptions in order to assess the consequences for an abstract model of society. Most economic textbooks follow the practice of carefully explaining the \"perfect competition\" model, mainly because this helps to understand departures from it (the so-called \"imperfect competition\" models).\nThe boundaries of what constitutes a market and what does not are relevant distinctions to make in economic analysis. In a general equilibrium context, a good is a specific concept including geographical and time-related characteristics. Most studies of market structure relax a little their definition of a good, allowing for more flexibility in the identification of substitute goods.\nCharacteristics.\nA monopoly has at least one of these five characteristics:\nMarket power can be estimated with Lerner index. High profit margins might be caused by different factors, such as risk premiums or monopoly profits.\nMonopolies can cause corruption or political bias.\nSources of monopoly power.\nMonopolies derive their market power from barriers to entry \u2013 circumstances that prevent or greatly impede a potential competitor's ability to compete in a market. There are three major types of barriers to entry: economic, legal, and deliberate.\nIn addition to barriers to entry and competition, barriers to exit may be a source of market power. Barriers to exit are market conditions that make it difficult or expensive for a company to end its involvement with a market. High liquidation costs are a primary barrier to exiting. Market exit and shutdown are sometimes separate events. The decision of whether to shut down or operate is not affected by exit barriers. A company will shut down if the price falls below the minimum average variable costs.\nMonopoly versus competitive markets.\nWhile monopoly and perfect competition represent the extremes of market structures There is some similarity. The cost functions are the same. Both monopolies and perfectly competitive (PC) companies minimize cost and maximize profit. The shutdown decisions are the same. Both are assumed to have perfectly competitive factor markets. There are distinctions; some of the most important are as follows:\nThe most significant distinction between a PC company and a monopoly is that the monopoly has a downward-sloping demand curve rather than the \"perceived\" perfectly elastic curve of the PC company. Practically all the variations mentioned above relate to this fact. If there is a downward-sloping demand curve, then by necessity there is a distinct marginal revenue curve. The implications of this fact are best made manifest with a linear demand curve. Assume that the inverse demand curve is of the form formula_3. Then the total revenue curve is formula_4 and the marginal revenue curve is thus formula_5. From this several things are evident. First, the marginal revenue curve has the same formula_6-intercept as the inverse demand curve. Second, the slope of the marginal revenue curve is twice that of the inverse demand curve. What is not quite so evident is that the marginal revenue curve is below the inverse demand curve at all points (formula_7). Since all companies maximise profits by equating formula_8 and formula_9 it must be the case that at the profit-maximizing quantity MR and MC are less than price, which further implies that a monopoly produces less quantity at a higher price than if the market were perfectly competitive.\nThe fact that a monopoly has a downward-sloping demand curve means that the relationship between total revenue and output for a monopoly is much different from that of competitive companies. Total revenue equals price times quantity. A competitive company has a perfectly elastic demand curve meaning that total revenue is proportional to output. Thus the total revenue curve for a competitive company is a ray with a slope equal to the market price. A competitive company can sell all the output it desires at the market price. For a monopoly to increase sales it must reduce price. Thus the total revenue curve for a monopoly is a parabola that begins at the origin and reaches a maximum value then continuously decreases until total revenue is again zero. Total revenue has its maximum value when the slope of the total revenue function is zero. The slope of the total revenue function is marginal revenue. So the revenue maximizing quantity and price occur when formula_10. For example, assume that the monopoly's demand function is formula_11. The total revenue function would be formula_12 and marginal revenue would be formula_13. Setting marginal revenue equal to zero we have\n formula_14\n formula_15\n formula_16\nSo the revenue maximizing quantity for the monopoly is 12.5 units and the revenue-maximizing price is 25.\nA company with a monopoly does not experience price pressure from competitors, although it may experience pricing pressure from potential competition. If a company increases prices too much, then others may enter the market if they are able to provide the same good, or a substitute, at a lesser price. The idea that monopolies in markets with easy entry need not be regulated against is known as the \"revolution in monopoly theory\".\nA monopolist can extract only one premium, and getting into complementary markets does not pay. That is, the total profits a monopolist could earn if it sought to leverage its monopoly in one market by monopolizing a complementary market are equal to the extra profits it could earn anyway by charging more for the monopoly product itself. However, the one monopoly profit theorem is not true if customers in the monopoly good are stranded or poorly informed, or if the tied good has high fixed costs.\nA pure monopoly has the same economic rationality of perfectly competitive companies, i.e. to optimise a profit function given some constraints. By the assumptions of increasing marginal costs, exogenous inputs' prices, and control concentrated on a single agent or entrepreneur, the optimal decision is to equate the marginal cost and marginal revenue of production. Nonetheless, a pure monopoly can \u2013 unlike a competitive company \u2013 alter the market price for its own convenience: a decrease of production results in a higher price. In the economics' jargon, it is said that pure monopolies have \"a downward-sloping demand\". An important consequence of such behaviour is that typically a monopoly selects a higher price and lesser quantity of output than a price-taking company; again, less is available at a higher price.\nInverse elasticity rule.\nA monopoly chooses that price that maximizes the difference between total revenue and total cost. The basic markup rule (as measured by the Lerner index) can be expressed as\nformula_17,\nwhere formula_18 is the price elasticity of demand the firm faces. The markup rules indicate that the ratio between profit margin and the price is inversely proportional to the price elasticity of demand. The implication of the rule is that the more elastic the demand for the product the less pricing power the monopoly has.\nMarket power.\nMarket power is the ability to increase the product's price above marginal cost without losing all customers. Perfectly competitive (PC) companies have zero market power when it comes to setting prices. All companies of a PC market are price takers. The price is set by the interaction of demand and supply at the market or aggregate level. Individual companies simply take the price determined by the market and produce that quantity of output that maximizes the company's profits. If a PC company attempted to increase prices above the market level all its customers would abandon the company and purchase at the market price from other companies. A monopoly has considerable although not unlimited market power. A monopoly has the power to set prices or quantities although not both. A monopoly is a price maker. The monopoly is the market and prices are set by the monopolist based on their circumstances and not the interaction of demand and supply. The two primary factors determining monopoly market power are the company's demand curve and its cost structure.\nMarket power is the ability to affect the terms and conditions of exchange so that the price of a product is set by a single company (price is not imposed by the market as in perfect competition). Although a monopoly's market power is great it is still limited by the demand side of the market. A monopoly has a negatively sloped demand curve, not a perfectly inelastic curve. Consequently, any price increase will result in the loss of some customers.\nPrice discrimination.\nPrice discrimination allows a monopolist to increase its profit by charging higher prices for identical goods to those who are willing or able to pay more. For example, most economic textbooks cost more in the United States than in developing countries like Ethiopia. In this case, the publisher is using its government-granted copyright monopoly to price discriminate between the generally wealthier American economics students and the generally poorer Ethiopian economics students. Similarly, most patented medications cost more in the U.S. than in other countries with a (presumed) poorer customer base. Typically, a high general price is listed, and various market segments get varying discounts. This is an example of framing to make the process of charging some people higher prices more socially acceptable. Perfect price discrimination would allow the monopolist to charge each customer the exact maximum amount they would be willing to pay. This would allow the monopolist to extract all the consumer surplus of the market. A domestic example would be the cost of airplane flights in relation to their takeoff time; the closer they are to flight, the higher the plane tickets will cost, discriminating against late planners and often business flyers. While such perfect price discrimination is a theoretical construct, advances in information technology and micromarketing may bring it closer to the realm of possibility.\nPartial price discrimination can cause some customers who are inappropriately pooled with high price customers to be excluded from the market. For example, a poor student in the U.S. might be excluded from purchasing an economics textbook at the U.S. price, which the student may have been able to purchase at the Ethiopian price. Similarly, a wealthy student in Ethiopia may be able to or willing to buy at the U.S. price, though naturally would hide such a fact from the monopolist so as to pay the reduced third world price. These are deadweight losses and decrease a monopolist's profits. Deadweight loss is considered detrimental to society and market participation. As such, monopolists have substantial economic interest in improving their market information and \"market segmenting\".\nThere is important information for one to remember when considering the monopoly model diagram (and its associated conclusions) displayed here. The result that monopoly prices are higher, and production output lesser, than a competitive company follow from a requirement that the monopoly not charge different prices for different customers. That is, the monopoly is restricted from engaging in price discrimination (this is termed first degree price discrimination, such that all customers are charged the same amount). If the monopoly were permitted to charge individualised prices (this is termed third degree price discrimination), the quantity produced, and the price charged to the \"marginal\" customer, would be identical to that of a competitive company, thus eliminating the deadweight loss; however, all gains from trade (social welfare) would accrue to the monopolist and none to the consumer. In essence, every consumer would be indifferent between going completely without the product or service and being able to purchase it from the monopolist.\nAs long as the price elasticity of demand for most customers is less than one in absolute value, it is advantageous for a company to increase its prices: it receives more money for fewer goods. With a price increase, price elasticity tends to increase, and in the optimum case above it will be greater than one for most customers.\nA company maximizes profit by selling where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. A company that does not engage in price discrimination will charge the profit maximizing price, formula_19, to all its customers. In such circumstances there are customers who would be willing to pay a higher price than formula_19 and those who will not pay formula_19 but would buy at a lower price. A price discrimination strategy is to charge less price sensitive buyers a higher price and the more price sensitive buyers a lower price. Thus additional revenue is generated from two sources. The basic problem is to identify customers by their willingness to pay.\nThe purpose of price discrimination is to transfer consumer surplus to the producer. Consumer surplus is the difference between the value of a good to a consumer and the price the consumer must pay in the market to purchase it. Price discrimination is not limited to monopolies.\nMarket power is a company's ability to increase prices without losing all its customers. Any company that has market power can engage in price discrimination. Perfect competition is the only market form in which price discrimination would be impossible (a perfectly competitive company has a perfectly elastic demand curve and has no market power).\nThere are three forms of price discrimination. First degree price discrimination charges each consumer the maximum price the consumer is willing to pay. Second degree price discrimination involves quantity discounts. Third degree price discrimination involves grouping consumers according to willingness to pay as measured by their price elasticities of demand and charging each group a different price. Third degree price discrimination is the most prevalent type.\nThere are three conditions that must be present for a company to engage in successful price discrimination. First, the company must have market power. Second, the company must be able to sort customers according to their willingness to pay for the good. Third, the firm must be able to prevent resell.\nA company must have some degree of market power to practice price discrimination. Without market power a company cannot charge more than the market price. Any market structure characterized by a downward sloping demand curve has market power \u2013 monopoly, monopolistic competition and oligopoly. The only market structure that has no market power is perfect competition.\nA company wishing to practice price discrimination must be able to prevent middlemen or brokers from acquiring the consumer surplus for themselves. The company accomplishes this by preventing or limiting resale. Many methods are used to prevent resale. For instance, persons are required to show photographic identification and a boarding pass before boarding an airplane. Most travelers assume that this practice is strictly a matter of security. However, a primary purpose in requesting photographic identification is to confirm that the ticket purchaser is the person about to board the airplane and not someone who has repurchased the ticket from a discount buyer.\nThe inability to prevent resale is the largest obstacle to successful price discrimination. Companies have, however, developed numerous methods to prevent resale. For example, universities require that students show identification before entering sporting events. Governments may make it illegal to resell tickets or products. In Boston, Red Sox baseball tickets can only be resold legally to the team.\nThe three basic forms of price discrimination are first, second and third degree price discrimination. In \"first degree price discrimination\" the company charges the maximum price each customer is willing to pay. The maximum price a consumer is willing to pay for a unit of the good is the reservation price. Thus for each unit the seller tries to set the price equal to the consumer's reservation price. Direct information about a consumer's willingness to pay is rarely available. Sellers tend to rely on secondary information such as where a person lives (postal codes); for example, catalog retailers can use mail high-priced catalogs to high-income postal codes. First degree price discrimination most frequently occurs in regard to professional services or in transactions involving direct buyer-seller negotiations. For example, an accountant who has prepared a consumer's tax return has information that can be used to charge customers based on an estimate of their ability to pay.\nIn \"second degree price discrimination\" or quantity discrimination customers are charged different prices based on how much they buy. There is a single price schedule for all consumers but the prices vary depending on the quantity of the good bought. The theory of second degree price discrimination is a consumer is willing to buy only a certain quantity of a good at a given price. Companies know that consumer's willingness to buy decreases as more units are purchased. The task for the seller is to identify these price points and to reduce the price once one is reached in the hope that a reduced price will trigger additional purchases from the consumer. For example, sell in unit blocks rather than individual units.\nIn \"third degree price discrimination\" or multi-market price discrimination the seller divides the consumers into different groups according to their willingness to pay as measured by their price elasticity of demand. Each group of consumers effectively becomes a separate market with its own demand curve and marginal revenue curve. The firm then attempts to maximize profits in each segment by equating MR and MC, Generally the company charges a higher price to the group with a more price inelastic demand and a relatively lesser price to the group with a more elastic demand. Examples of third degree price discrimination abound. Airlines charge higher prices to business travelers than to vacation travelers. The reasoning is that the demand curve for a vacation traveler is relatively elastic while the demand curve for a business traveler is relatively inelastic. Any determinant of price elasticity of demand can be used to segment markets. For example, seniors have a more elastic demand for movies than do young adults because they generally have more free time. Thus theaters will offer discount tickets to seniors.\nExample.\nAssume that by a uniform pricing system the monopolist would sell five units at a price of $10 per unit. Assume that his marginal cost is $5 per unit. Total revenue would be $50, total costs would be $25 and profits would be $25. If the monopolist practiced price discrimination he would sell the first unit for $17 the second unit for $14 and so on which is listed in the table below. Total revenue would be $55, his total cost would be $25 and his profit would be $30. Several things are worth noting. The monopolist acquires all the consumer surplus and eliminates practically all the deadweight loss because he is willing to sell to anyone who is willing to pay at least the marginal cost. Thus the price discrimination promotes efficiency. Secondly, by the pricing scheme price = average revenue and equals marginal revenue. That is the monopolist behaving like a perfectly competitive company. Thirdly, the discriminating monopolist produces a larger quantity than the monopolist operating by a uniform pricing scheme.\nClassifying customers.\nSuccessful price discrimination requires that companies separate consumers according to their willingness to buy. Determining a customer's willingness to buy a good is difficult. Asking consumers directly is fruitless: consumers do not know, and to the extent they do they are reluctant to share that information with marketers. The two main methods for determining willingness to buy are observation of personal characteristics and consumer actions. As noted information about where a person lives (postal codes), how the person dresses, what kind of car he or she drives, occupation, and income and spending patterns can be helpful in classifying. \nMonopoly and efficiency.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n The price of monopoly is upon every occasion the highest which can be got. The natural price, or the price of free competition, on the contrary, is the lowest which can be taken, not upon every occasion indeed, but for any considerable time together. The one is upon every occasion the highest which can be squeezed out of the buyers, or which it is supposed they will consent to give; the other is the lowest which the sellers can commonly afford to take, and at the same time continue their business.\n...Monopoly, besides, is a great enemy to good management.\n\u2013 Adam Smith (1776), \"The Wealth of Nations\"\nAccording to the standard model, in which a monopolist sets a single price for all consumers, the monopolist will sell a lesser quantity of goods at a higher price than would companies by perfect competition. Because the monopolist ultimately forgoes transactions with consumers who value the product or service less than its price, monopoly pricing creates a deadweight loss referring to potential gains that went neither to the monopolist nor to consumers. Deadweight loss is the cost to society because it is inefficient. Given the presence of this deadweight loss, the combined surplus (or wealth) for the monopolist and consumers is necessarily less than the total surplus obtained by consumers by perfect competition. Where efficiency is defined by the total gains from trade, the monopoly setting is less efficient than perfect competition.\nIt is often argued that monopolies tend to become less efficient and less innovative over time, becoming \"complacent\", because they do not have to be efficient or innovative to compete in the marketplace. Sometimes this very loss of psychological efficiency can increase a potential competitor's value enough to overcome market entry barriers, or provide incentive for research and investment into new alternatives. The theory of contestable markets argues that in some circumstances (private) monopolies are forced to behave \"as if\" there were competition because of the risk of losing their monopoly to new entrants. This is likely to happen when a market's barriers to entry are low. It might also be because of the availability in the longer term of substitutes in other markets. For example, a canal monopoly, while worth a great deal during the late 18th century United Kingdom, was worth much less during the late 19th century because of the introduction of railways as a substitute.\nContrary to common misconception, monopolists do not try to sell items for the highest possible price, nor do they try to maximize profit per unit, but rather they try to maximize total profit.\nNatural monopoly.\nA natural monopoly is an organization that experiences increasing returns to scale over the relevant range of output and relatively high fixed costs. A natural monopoly occurs where the average cost of production \"declines throughout the relevant range of product demand\". The relevant range of product demand is where the average cost curve is below the demand curve. When this situation occurs, it is always more efficient for one large company to supply the market than multiple smaller companies; in fact, absent government intervention in such markets, will naturally evolve into a monopoly. Often, a natural monopoly is the outcome of an initial rivalry between several competitors. An early market entrant that takes advantage of the cost structure and can expand rapidly can exclude smaller companies from entering and can drive or buy out other companies. A natural monopoly suffers from the same inefficiencies as any other monopoly. Left to its own devices, a profit-seeking natural monopoly will produce where marginal revenue equals marginal costs. Regulation of natural monopolies is problematic. Fragmenting such monopolies is by definition inefficient. The most frequently used methods dealing with natural monopolies are government regulations and public ownership. Government regulation generally consists of regulatory commissions charged with the principal duty of setting prices. Natural monopolies are synonymous with what is called \"single-unit enterprise\", a term which was used in the 1914 book \"Social Economics\" written by Friedrich von Wieser. As mentioned, government regulations are frequently used with natural monopolies to help control prices. An example that can illustrate this can be found when looking at the United States Postal Service, which has a monopoly over types of mail. According to Wieser, the idea of a competitive market within the postal industry would lead to extreme prices and unnecessary spending, and this highlighted why government regulation in the form of price control is necessary as it helped efficient market.\nTo reduce prices and increase output, regulators often use average cost pricing. By average cost pricing, the price and quantity are determined by the intersection of the average cost curve and the demand curve. This pricing scheme eliminates any positive economic profits since price equals average cost. Average-cost pricing is not perfect. Regulators must estimate average costs. Companies have a reduced incentive to lower costs. Regulation of this type has not been limited to natural monopolies. Average-cost pricing does also have some disadvantages. By setting price equal to the intersection of the demand curve and the average total cost curve, the firm's output is allocatively inefficient as the price is less than the marginal cost (which is the output quantity for a perfectly competitive and allocatively efficient market).\nIn 1848, J.S. Mill was the first individual to describe monopolies with the adjective \"natural\". He used it interchangeably with \"practical\". At the time, Mill gave the following examples of natural or practical monopolies: gas supply, water supply, roads, canals, and railways. In his \"Social Economics\", Friedrich von Wieser demonstrated his view of the postal service as a natural monopoly: \"In the face of [such] single-unit administration, the principle of competition becomes utterly abortive. The parallel network of another postal organization, beside the one already functioning, would be economically absurd; enormous amounts of money for plant and management would have to be expended for no purpose whatever.\"\nOverall, most monopolies are man-made monopolies, or unnatural monopolies, not natural ones.\nGovernment-granted monopoly.\nA government-granted monopoly (also called a \"\"de jure\" monopoly\") is a form of \"coercive monopoly\", in which a government grants exclusive privilege to a private individual or company to be the sole provider of a commodity. Monopoly may be granted explicitly, as when potential competitors are excluded from the market by a specific law, or implicitly, such as when the requirements of an administrative regulation can only be fulfilled by a single market player, or through some other legal or procedural mechanism, such as patents, trademarks, and copyright. These monopolies can also be the result of \"rent-seeking\" behavior, where firms will try to get the prize of having a monopoly, and the increase of profits in acquiring one from a competitive market in their sector.\nMonopolist shutdown rule.\nA monopolist should (assuming they want to earn money) shut down when price is less than average variable cost for every output level \u2013 in other words where the demand curve is entirely below the average variable cost curve. Under these circumstances at the profit maximum level of output (MR = MC) average revenue would be less than average variable costs and the monopolists would be better off shutting down in the short term.\nBreaking up monopolies.\nMonopolies can potentially end by new competition, breakaway businesses, or consumers seeking alternatives. Governments will often either regulate the monopoly, convert it into a publicly owned monopoly environment, or forcibly fragment it (see Antitrust law and trust busting). Public utilities, often being naturally efficient with only one operator and therefore less susceptible to efficient breakup, are often strongly regulated or publicly owned. American Telephone &amp; Telegraph (AT&amp;T) and Standard Oil are often cited as examples of the breakup of a private monopoly by government. The Bell System, later AT&amp;T, was protected from competition first by the Kingsbury Commitment, and later by a series of agreements between AT&amp;T and the Federal Government. In 1984, decades after having been granted monopoly power by force of law, AT&amp;T was broken up into various components, MCI, Sprint, who were able to compete effectively in the long-distance phone market. While some have been against breakups as remedies for antitrust enforcement, recent scholarship has found that this hostility to breakups by administrators is largely unwarranted.' In fact, some scholars have argued that breakups, even if incorrectly targeted, could still encourage collaboration, innovation, and efficiency.' Regulation to increase competition in case of digital monopolies can vary depending on the type of anti-competitive practices.\nTaxes on monopolists can incentivize entry of new competitors.\nLaw.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Corporations are creatures of the State, and the public safety requires that their conduct and functions shall be always controlled by their creator. They must be not only subordinated to the laws to which natural persons must bow, but they must be compelled to serve the public purposes for which they are created, and for which alone they should be permitted to live. Monopoly is bad enough in private hands, but it is a menace to all human rights when entrusted to artificial monsters uncontrolled by law and incapable of moral restraint.\"\n\u2014 Future Congressman James G. Maguire in a speech given during the 1880 United States presidential election\nThe law regulating dominance in the European Union is governed by Article 102 of the \"Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union\" which aims at enhancing the consumer's welfare and also the efficiency of allocation of resources by protecting competition on the downstream market. The existence of a very high market share does not always mean consumers are paying excessive prices, since the threat of new entrants to the market can restrain a high-market-share company's price increases. Competition law does not make merely having a monopoly illegal but rather abusing the power a monopoly may confer, for instance, through exclusionary practices (i.e., pricing high just because it is the only one around). It should also be noted that it is illegal to try to obtain a monopoly through practices like buying out the competition or similar methods. If a monopoly occurs naturally, such as a competitor going out of business or a lack of competition, it is not illegal until the monopoly holder abuses their power.\nEstablishing dominance.\nFirst, it is necessary to determine whether a company is dominant, or whether it behaves \u201cto an appreciable extent independently of its competitors, customers, and ultimately its consumers.\u201d Establishing dominance is a two-stage test. The first thing to consider is market definition, which is one of the crucial factors of the test. This includes the relevant product market and the relevant geographic market.\nRelevant product market.\nAs the definition of the market is of a matter of interchangeability, if the goods or services are regarded as interchangeable then they are within the same product market. For example, in the case of \"United Brands v Commission\", it was argued in this case that bananas and other fresh fruit were in the same product market and later on dominance was found because the special features of the banana made it could only be interchangeable with other fresh fruits in a limited extent and other and is only exposed to their competition in a way that is hardly perceptible. The demand substitutability of the goods and services will help in defining the product market and it can be access by the 'hypothetical monopolist' test or the 'SSNIP' test.\nRelevant geographic market.\nIt is necessary to define it because some goods can only be supplied within a narrow area due to technical, practical or legal reasons and this may help to indicate which undertakings impose a competitive constraint on the other undertakings in question. Since some goods are too expensive to transport where it might not be economic to sell them to distant markets in relation to their value, therefore the cost of transporting is a crucial factor here. Other factors might be legal controls which restricts an undertaking in a Member States from exporting goods or services to another.\nMarket definition may be difficult to measure but is important because if it is defined too narrowly, the undertaking may be more likely to be found dominant and if it is defined too broadly, the less likely that it will be found dominant.\nMarket shares.\nAs with collusive conduct, market shares are determined with reference to the particular market in which the company and product in question is sold. It does not in itself determine whether an undertaking is dominant but work as an indicator of the states of the existing competition within the market. The Herfindahl\u2013Hirschman Index (HHI) is sometimes used to assess how competitive an industry is. It sums up the squares of the individual market shares of all of the competitors within the market. The lower the total, the less concentrated the market and the higher the total, the more concentrated the market. In the US, the merger guidelines state that a post-merger HHI below 1000 is viewed as not concentrated while HHIs above that will provoke further review.\nBy European Union law, very large market shares raise a presumption that a company is dominant, which may be rebuttable. A market share of 100% may be very rare but it is still possible to be found and in fact it has been identified in some cases, for instance the \"AAMS v Commission\" case. Undertakings possessing market share that is lower than 100% but over 90% had also been found dominant, for example, Microsoft v Commission case. In the \"AKZO v Commission\" case, the undertaking is presumed to be dominant if it has a market share of 50%. There are also findings of dominance that are below a market share of 50%, for instance, \"United Brands v Commission\", it only possessed a market share of 40% to 45% and still to be found dominant with other factors. The lowest yet market share of a company considered \"dominant\" in the EU was 39.7%. If a company has a dominant position, then there is a special responsibility not to allow its conduct to impair competition on the common market; however, these will all falls away if it is not dominant.\nWhen considering whether an undertaking is dominant, it involves a combination of factors. Each of them cannot be taken separately as if they are, they will not be as determinative as they are when they are combined. Also, in cases where an undertaking has previously been found dominant, it is still necessary to redefine the market and make a whole new analysis of the conditions of competition based on the available evidence at the appropriate time.\nOther related factors.\nAccording to the Guidance, there are three more issues that must be examined. They are actual competitors that relates to the market position of the dominant undertaking and its competitors, potential competitors that concerns the expansion and entry and lastly the countervailing buyer power.\nMarket share may be a valuable source of information regarding the market structure and the market position when it comes to accessing it. The dynamics of the market and the extent to which the goods and services differentiated are relevant in this area.\nIt concerns with the competition that would come from other undertakings which are not yet operating in the market but will enter it in the future. So, market shares may not be useful in accessing the competitive pressure that is exerted on an undertaking in this area. The potential entry by new firms and expansions by an undertaking must be taken into account, therefore the barriers to entry and barriers to expansion is an important factor here.\nCompetitive constraints may not always come from actual or potential competitors. Sometimes, it may also come from powerful customers who have sufficient bargaining strength which come from its size or its commercial significance for a dominant firm.\nTypes of abuses.\nThere are three main types of abuses which are exploitative abuse, exclusionary abuse and single market abuse.\nIt arises when a monopolist has such significant market power that it can restrict its output while increasing the price above the competitive level without losing customers. This type is less concerned by the Commission than other types.\nThis is most concerned about by the Commissions because it is capable of causing long-term consumer damage and is more likely to prevent the development of competition. An example of it is exclusive dealing agreements.\nIt arises when a dominant undertaking carrying out excess pricing which would not only have an exploitative effect but also prevent parallel imports and limits intra-brand competition.\nExamples of abuses.\nDespite wide agreement that the above constitute abusive practices, there is some debate about whether there needs to be a causal connection between the dominant position of a company and its actual abusive conduct. Furthermore, there has been some consideration of what happens when a company merely attempts to abuse its dominant position.\nTo provide a more specific example, economic and philosophical scholar Adam Smith cites that trade to the East India Company has, for the most part, been subjected to an exclusive company such as that of the English or Dutch. Monopolies such as these are generally established against the nation in which they arose out of. The profound economist goes on to state how there are two types of monopolies. The first type of monopoly is one which tends to always attract to the particular trade where the monopoly was conceived, a greater proportion of the stock of the society than what would go to that trade originally. The second type of monopoly tends to occasionally attract stock towards the particular trade where it was conceived, and sometimes repel it from that trade depending on varying circumstances. Rich countries tended to repel while poorer countries were attracted to this. For example, The Dutch company would dispose of any excess goods not taken to the market in order to preserve their monopoly while the English sold more goods for better prices. Both of these tendencies were extremely destructive as can be seen in Adam Smith's writings.\nHistorical monopolies.\nOrigin.\nThe term \"monopoly\" first appears in Aristotle's \"Politics\". Aristotle describes Thales of Miletus's cornering of the market in olive presses as a monopoly (\"\u03bc\u03bf\u03bd\u03bf\u03c0\u03ce\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd\"). Another early reference to the concept of \"monopoly\" in a commercial sense appears in tractate Demai of the Mishna (2nd century CE), regarding the purchasing of agricultural goods from a dealer who has a monopoly on the produce (chapter 5; 4). The meaning and understanding of the English word 'monopoly' has changed over the years.\nMonopolies of resources.\nSalt.\nVending of common salt (sodium chloride) was historically a natural monopoly. Until recently, a combination of strong sunshine and low humidity or an extension of peat marshes was necessary for producing salt from the sea, the most plentiful source. Changing sea levels periodically caused salt \"famines\" and communities were forced to depend upon those who controlled the scarce inland mines and salt springs, which were often in hostile areas (e.g. the Sahara) requiring well-organised security for transport, storage, and distribution.\nThe Salt Commission was a legal monopoly in China. Formed in 758, the commission controlled salt production and sales in order to raise tax revenue for the Tang dynasty.\nThe \"Gabelle\" was a notoriously high tax levied upon salt in the Kingdom of France. The much-hated levy had a role in the beginning of the French Revolution, when strict legal controls specified who was allowed to sell and distribute salt. First instituted in 1286, the Gabelle was not permanently abolished until 1945.\nCoal.\nRobin Gollan argues in \"The Coalminers of New South Wales\" that anti-competitive practices developed in the coal industry of Australia's Newcastle as a result of the business cycle. The monopoly was generated by formal meetings of the local management of coal companies agreeing to fix a minimum price for sale at dock. This collusion was known as \"The Vend\". The Vend ended and was reformed repeatedly during the late 19th century, ending by recession in the business cycle. \"The Vend\" was able to maintain its monopoly due to trade union assistance, and material advantages (primarily coal geography). During the early 20th century, as a result of comparable monopolistic practices in the Australian coastal shipping business, the Vend developed as an informal and illegal collusion between the steamship owners and the coal industry, eventually resulting in the High Court case \"Adelaide Steamship Co. Ltd v. R. &amp; AG\".\nPersian filoselle (raw silk).\nIn the 17th century, Shah Abbas established New Julfa (a suburb in the capital of Isfahan) to concentrate Armenian financial capital in Iran. Accordingly, he gave Armenians various privileges, including the monopoly to trade Persian filoselle (raw silk). Armenians exported it all over the world, including Asia, Europe, and America. By the 1750s, Armenia already controlled 75% of the total silk trade in the area. This resulted in a boom in Armenian commerce, which lasted for the next 150 years. At present, as it happens, Armenia's own economy is itself highly monopolized; in fact, with 19% of its economy monopolized, Armenia was the most monopolized country in Eastern Europe and Central Asia in 2009.\nPetroleum.\nStandard Oil was an American oil producing, transporting, refining, and marketing company. Established in 1870, it became the largest oil refiner in the world. John D. Rockefeller was a founder, chairman and major shareholder. The company was an innovator in the development of the business trust. The Standard Oil trust streamlined production and logistics, lowered costs, and undercut competitors. \"Trust-busting\" critics accused Standard Oil of using aggressive pricing to destroy competitors and form a monopoly that threatened consumers. Its controversial history as one of the world's first and largest multinational corporations ended in 1911, when the United States Supreme Court ruled that Standard was an illegal monopoly. The Standard Oil trust was dissolved into 33 smaller companies; two of its surviving \"child\" companies are ExxonMobil and the Chevron Corporation.\nSteel.\nU.S. Steel has been accused of being a monopoly. J. P. Morgan and Elbert H. Gary founded U.S. Steel in 1901 by combining Andrew Carnegie's Carnegie Steel Company with Gary's Federal Steel Company and William Henry \"Judge\" Moore's National Steel Company. At one time, U.S. Steel was the largest steel producer and largest corporation in the world. In its first full year of operation, U.S. Steel made 67 percent of all the steel produced in the United States. However, U.S. Steel's share of the expanding market slipped to 50 percent by 1911, and antitrust prosecution that year failed.\nDiamonds.\nDe Beers settled charges of price-fixing in the diamond trade in the 2000s. De Beers is well known for its monopoloid practices throughout the 20th century, whereby it used its dominant position to manipulate the international diamond market. The company used several methods to exercise this control over the market. Firstly, it convinced independent producers to join its single channel monopoly, it flooded the market with diamonds similar to those of producers who refused to join the cartel, and lastly, it purchased and stockpiled diamonds produced by other manufacturers in order to control prices through limiting supply.\nIn 2000, the De Beers business model changed due to factors such as the decision by producers in Russia, Canada and Australia to distribute diamonds outside the De Beers channel, as well as rising awareness of blood diamonds that forced De Beers to \"avoid the risk of bad publicity\" by limiting sales to its own mined products. De Beers' market share by value fell from as high as 90% in the 1980s to less than 40% in 2012, having resulted in a more fragmented diamond market with more transparency and greater liquidity.\nIn November 2011, the Oppenheimer family announced its intention to sell the entirety of its 40% stake in De Beers to Anglo American plc thereby increasing Anglo American's ownership of the company to 85%.[30] The transaction was worth \u00a33.2\u00a0billion ($5.1\u00a0billion) in cash and ended the Oppenheimer dynasty's 80-year ownership of De Beers.\nUtilities.\nA public utility (or simply \"utility\") is an organization or company that maintains the infrastructure for a public service or provides a set of services for public consumption. Common examples of utilities are electricity, natural gas, water, sewage, cable television, and telephone. In the United States, public utilities are often natural monopolies because the infrastructure required to produce and deliver a product such as electricity or water is very expensive to build and maintain.\nWestern Union was criticized as a \"price gouging\" monopoly in the late 19th century. American Telephone &amp; Telegraph was a telecommunications giant. AT&amp;T was broken up in 1984. In the case of Telecom New Zealand, local loop unbundling was enforced by central government.\nTelkom is a semi-privatised, part state-owned South African telecommunications company. Deutsche Telekom is a former state monopoly, still partially state owned. Deutsche Telekom currently monopolizes high-speed VDSL broadband network. The Long Island Power Authority (LIPA) provided electric service to over 1.1\u00a0million customers in Nassau and Suffolk counties of New York, and the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens.\nThe Comcast Corporation is the largest mass media and communications company in the world by revenue. It is the largest cable company and home Internet service provider in the United States, and the nation's third largest home telephone service provider. Comcast has a monopoly in Boston, Philadelphia, and many small towns across the US.\nTransportation.\nThe United Aircraft and Transport Corporation was an aircraft manufacturer holding company that was forced to divest itself of airlines in 1934.\nIarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann, the Irish Railway authority, is a current monopoly as Ireland does not have the size for more companies.\nThe Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) was founded in 1834, and since the mid-1800s has provided train service between Long Island and New York City. In the 1870s, LIRR became the sole railroad in that area through a series of acquisitions and consolidations. In 2013, the LIRR's commuter rail system is the busiest commuter railroad in North America, serving nearly 335,000 passengers daily.\nForeign trade.\nDutch East India Company was created as a legal trading monopoly in 1602. The \"Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie\" enjoyed huge profits from its spice monopoly through most of the 17th century.\nThe British East India Company was created as a legal trading monopoly in 1600. The East India Company was formed for pursuing trade with the East Indies but ended up trading mainly with the Indian subcontinent, North-West Frontier Province, and Balochistan. The Company traded in basic commodities, which included cotton, silk, indigo dye, salt, saltpetre, tea and opium.\nProfessional sports.\nBaseball.\nIn 1922, the US Supreme Court ruled in Federal Baseball Club v. National League that baseball was not the kind of commerce intended to be affected by federal antitrust, thus making baseball exempt from antitrust laws. The Supreme Court maintained their original ruling in both 1953 and 1972 when the issue was brought up in court. As a legal monopoly, the MLB has not had any competition in the American market since the early 1960s, from the defunct Continental League.\nAmerican Football.\nAfter mergers in 1949 with the AAFC and 1970 with the AFL, the National Football League was facing competition USFL following their successful first season in 1983. The USFL initially operated as a spring league, beginning their season approximately one month after the NFL season had concluded and would finish the season approximately one month prior to the start of NFL preseason games. With an increasing popularity and ability to sign big names, such as the 1982-84 Heisman Trophy winners Herschel Walker, Mike Rozier and Doug Flutie, the New Jersey Generals owner Donald Trump persuaded other owners to move the season so it directly competed with the NFL's. At the same time an antitrust lawsuit was filed against the NFL as it convinced the 3 major American television channels against broadcasting any USFL games. The trial lasted 42 days and the jury found the NFL has indeed acted monopolistically and violated antitrust laws but as the NFL was not directly responsible for the financial difficulties of the league, the USFL was awarded $1 in damages, which was tripled to $3 due to it being an antitrust case. The USFL announced it would forego the 1986 altogether to appeal the decision; however, the league would fold within a week of the trial ending. The US Supreme Court would, four years later, allow the original ruling to stand and order the NFL to pay damages and to include interest, bringing the total to $3.76. The NFL did previously survive an antitrust lawsuit in the 1960s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18879", "revid": "18360063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18879", "title": "Massachusetts Institute of Technology", "text": "Private university in Cambridge, Massachusetts, US\nThe Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) is a private research university in Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States. Established in 1861, MIT has played a significant role in the development of many areas of modern technology and science.\nIn response to American industrialization, William Barton Rogers organized a school in Boston to create \"useful knowledge.\" Initially funded by a federal land grant, the institute adopted a polytechnic model that stressed laboratory instruction in applied science and engineering. MIT moved from Boston to Cambridge in 1916 and grew rapidly through collaboration with private industry, military branches, and new federal basic research agencies, the formation of which was influenced by MIT faculty like Vannevar Bush. In the late twentieth century, MIT became a leading center for research in computer science, digital technology, artificial intelligence and big science initiatives like the Human Genome Project. Engineering remains its largest school, though MIT has also built programs in basic science, social sciences, business management, and humanities.\nThe institute has an urban campus that extends more than a mile (1.6\u00a0km) along the Charles River. The campus is known for academic buildings interconnected by corridors and many significant modernist buildings. MIT's off-campus operations include the MIT Lincoln Laboratory and the Haystack Observatory, as well as affiliated laboratories such as the Broad and Whitehead Institutes. The institute also has a strong entrepreneurial culture and MIT alumni have founded or co-founded many notable companies.\nAs of \u00a02024[ [update]], 105 Nobel laureates, 26 Turing Award winners, and 8 Fields Medalists have been affiliated with MIT as alumni, faculty members, or researchers. In addition, 58 National Medal of Science recipients, 29 National Medals of Technology and Innovation recipients, 50 MacArthur Fellows, 83 Marshall Scholars, 41 astronauts, 16 Chief Scientists of the US Air Force, and 8 foreign heads of state have been affiliated with MIT.\nHistory.\nFoundation and vision.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] a school of industrial science aiding the advancement, development and practical application of science in connection with arts, agriculture, manufactures, and commerce [...]\u2014\u200a\nIn 1859, a proposal was submitted to the Massachusetts General Court to use newly filled lands in Back Bay, Boston for a \"Conservatory of Art and Science\", but the proposal failed. A charter for the incorporation of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, proposed by William Barton Rogers, was signed by John Albion Andrew, the governor of Massachusetts, on April 10, 1861.\nRogers, a geologist who had recently arrived in Boston from the University of Virginia, wanted to establish an institution to address rapid scientific and technological advances. He did not wish to found a professional school, but a combination with elements of both professional and liberal education, proposing that:\nThe true and only practicable object of a polytechnic school is, as I conceive, the teaching, not of the minute details and manipulations of the arts, which can be done only in the workshop, but the inculcation of those scientific principles which form the basis and explanation of them, and along with this, a full and methodical review of all their leading processes and operations in connection with physical laws.\nThe Rogers Plan reflected the German research university model, emphasizing an independent faculty engaged in research, as well as instruction oriented around seminars and laboratories.&lt;ref name=\"Angulo https://archive.org/details/williambartonrog00angu/page/155 155\u2013156\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nEarly developments.\nTwo days after MIT was chartered, the first battle of the Civil War broke out. After a long delay through the war years, MIT's first classes were held in the Mercantile Building in Boston in 1865. The new institute was founded as part of the Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act to fund institutions \"to promote the liberal and practical education of the industrial classes\" and was a land-grant school. In 1863 under the same act, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts founded the Massachusetts Agricultural College, which developed as the University of Massachusetts Amherst. In 1866, the proceeds from land sales went toward new buildings in the Back Bay.\nMIT was informally called \"Boston Tech\". The institute adopted the European polytechnic university model and emphasized laboratory instruction from an early date. Despite chronic financial problems, the institute saw growth in the last two decades of the 19th century under President Francis Amasa Walker. Programs in electrical, chemical, marine, and sanitary engineering were introduced, new buildings were built, and the size of the student body increased to more than one thousand.\nThe curriculum drifted to a vocational emphasis, with less focus on theoretical science. The fledgling school still suffered from chronic financial shortages which diverted the attention of the MIT leadership. During these \"Boston Tech\" years, MIT faculty and alumni rebuffed Harvard University president (and former MIT faculty) Charles W. Eliot's repeated attempts to merge MIT with Harvard College's Lawrence Scientific School. There would be at least six attempts to absorb MIT into Harvard. In its cramped Back Bay location, MIT could not afford to expand its overcrowded facilities, driving a desperate search for a new campus and funding. Eventually, the MIT Corporation approved a formal agreement to merge with Harvard and move to Allston, over the vehement objections of MIT faculty, students, and alumni. The merger plan collapsed in 1905 when the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ruled that MIT could not sell its Back Bay land.\nIn 1912, MIT acquired its current campus by purchasing a one-mile (1.6\u00a0km) tract of filled lands along the Cambridge side of the Charles River. The neoclassical \"New Technology\" campus was designed by William W. Bosworth and had been funded largely by anonymous donations from a mysterious \"Mr. Smith\", starting in 1912. In January 1920, the donor was revealed to be the industrialist George Eastman, an inventor of film production methods and founder of Eastman Kodak. Between 1912 and 1920, Eastman donated $20 million ($ million in 2024 dollars) in cash and Kodak stock to MIT. In 1916, with the first academic buildings complete, the MIT administration and the MIT charter crossed the Charles River on the ceremonial barge \"Bucentaur\" built for the occasion.\nNeeding funds to match Eastman's gift and cover retreating state support, President Richard MacLaurin launched an industry funding model known as the \"Technology Plan\" in 1920. As MIT grew under the Tech Plan, it built new postgraduate programs that stressed laboratory work on industry problems, including a new program in electrical engineering. Gerard Swope, MIT's chairman and head of General Electric, believed talented engineers needed scientific research training. In 1930, he recruited Karl Taylor Compton to helm MIT's transformation as a \"technological\" research university and to build more autonomy from private industry.\nCurricular reforms.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... a special type of educational institution which can be defined as a university polarized around science, engineering, and the arts. We might call it a university limited in its objectives but unlimited in the breadth and the thoroughness with which it pursues these objectives.\u2014\u200a\nIn the 1930s, President Karl Taylor Compton and Vice-President (effectively Provost) Vannevar Bush emphasized the importance of pure sciences like physics and chemistry and reduced the vocational practice required in shops and drafting studios. The Compton reforms \"renewed confidence in the ability of the Institute to develop leadership in science as well as in engineering\". Unlike Ivy League schools, MIT catered more to middle-class families, and depended more on tuition than on endowments or grants for its funding.\nStill, as late as 1949, the Lewis Committee lamented in its report on the state of education at MIT that \"the Institute is widely conceived as basically a vocational school\", a \"partly unjustified\" perception the committee sought to change. The report comprehensively reviewed the undergraduate curriculum, recommended offering a broader education, and warned against letting engineering and government-sponsored research detract from the sciences and humanities. The School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences and the MIT Sloan School of Management were formed in 1950 to compete with the powerful Schools of Science and Engineering. Previously minor faculties in the areas of economics, management, political science, and linguistics emerged into cohesive and assertive departments by attracting respected professors and launching competitive graduate programs. Humanities and social science programs continued to develop under the successive terms of the more humanistically oriented presidents Howard W. Johnson and Jerome Wiesner between 1966 and 1980.\nDefense research.\nMIT's involvement in military research projects surged during World War II. In 1941, Vannevar Bush was appointed head of the federal Office of Scientific Research and Development and directed funding to only a select group of universities, including MIT. Engineers and scientists from across the country gathered at MIT's Radiation Laboratory, established in 1940 to assist the British military in developing microwave radar. The work done there significantly affected both the war and subsequent research in the area. Other defense projects included gyroscope-based and other complex control systems for gunsight, bombsight, and inertial navigation under Charles Stark Draper's Instrumentation Laboratory; the development of a digital computer for flight simulations under Project Whirlwind; and high-speed and high-altitude photography under Harold Edgerton. By the end of the war, MIT became the nation's largest wartime R&amp;D contractor (attracting some criticism of Bush), employing nearly 4000 in the Radiation Laboratory alone and receiving in excess of $100 million ($ billion in 2015 dollars) before 1946. Work on defense projects continued even after then. Post-war government-sponsored research at MIT included SAGE and guidance systems for ballistic missiles and Project Apollo.\nThese activities affected MIT profoundly. A 1949 report noted the lack of \"any great slackening in the pace of life at the Institute\" to match the return to peacetime, remembering the \"academic tranquility of the prewar years\", though acknowledging the significant contributions of military research to the increased emphasis on graduate education and rapid growth of personnel and facilities. The faculty doubled and the graduate student body quintupled during the presidential terms of Karl Taylor Compton (1930\u20131948), James Rhyne Killian (1948\u20131957), and chancellor Julius Adams Stratton (1952\u20131957), whose institution-building strategies shaped the expanding university. By the 1950s, MIT no longer simply benefited the industries with which it had worked for three decades, and it had developed closer working relationships with new patrons, philanthropic foundations and the federal government.\nIn late 1960s and early 1970s, student and faculty activists protested against the Vietnam War and MIT's defense research. In this period MIT's various departments were researching helicopters, smart bombs and counterinsurgency techniques for the war in Vietnam as well as guidance systems for nuclear missiles. The Union of Concerned Scientists was founded on March 4, 1969 during a meeting of faculty members and students seeking to shift the emphasis on military research toward environmental and social problems. MIT ultimately divested itself from the Instrumentation Laboratory and moved all classified research off-campus to the MIT Lincoln Laboratory facility in 1973 in response to the protests. The student body, faculty, and administration remained comparatively unpolarized during what was a tumultuous time for many other universities. Johnson was seen to be highly successful in leading his institution to \"greater strength and unity\" after these times of turmoil. However six MIT students were sentenced to prison terms at this time and some former student leaders, such as Michael Albert and George Katsiaficas, are still indignant about MIT's role in military research and its suppression of these protests. (Richard Leacock's film, \"November Actions\", records some of these tumultuous events.)\nIn the 1980s, there was more controversy at MIT over its involvement in SDI (space weaponry) and CBW (chemical and biological warfare) research. More recently, MIT's research for the military has included work on robots, drones and 'battle suits'.\nRecent history.\nMIT has kept pace with and helped to advance the digital age. In addition to developing the predecessors to modern computing and networking technologies, students, staff, and faculty members at Project MAC, the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, and the Tech Model Railroad Club wrote some of the earliest interactive computer video games like \"Spacewar!\" and created much of modern hacker slang and culture. Several major computer-related organizations have originated at MIT since the 1980s: Richard Stallman's GNU Project and the subsequent Free Software Foundation were founded in the mid-1980s at the AI Lab; the MIT Media Lab was founded in 1985 by Nicholas Negroponte and Jerome Wiesner to promote research into novel uses of computer technology; the World Wide Web Consortium standards organization was founded at the Laboratory for Computer Science in 1994 by Tim Berners-Lee; the OpenCourseWare project has made course materials for over 2,000 MIT classes available online free of charge since 2002; and the One Laptop per Child initiative to expand computer education and connectivity to children worldwide was launched in 2005.\nMIT was named a sea-grant college in 1976 to support its programs in oceanography and marine sciences and was named a space-grant college in 1989 to support its aeronautics and astronautics programs. Despite diminishing government financial support over the past quarter century, MIT launched several successful development campaigns to significantly expand the campus: new dormitories and athletics buildings on west campus; the Tang Center for Management Education; several buildings in the northeast corner of campus supporting research into biology, brain and cognitive sciences, genomics, biotechnology, and cancer research; and a number of new \"backlot\" buildings on Vassar Street including the Stata Center. Construction on campus in the 2000s included expansions of the Media Lab, the Sloan School's eastern campus, and graduate residences in the northwest. In 2006, President Hockfield launched the MIT Energy Research Council to investigate the interdisciplinary challenges posed by increasing global energy consumption.\nIn 2001, inspired by the open source and open access movements, MIT launched OpenCourseWare to make the lecture notes, problem sets, syllabi, exams, and lectures from the great majority of its courses available online for no charge, though without any formal accreditation for coursework completed. While the cost of supporting and hosting the project is high, OCW expanded in 2005 to include other universities as a part of the OpenCourseWare Consortium, which currently includes more than 250 academic institutions with content available in at least six languages. In 2011, MIT announced it would offer formal certification (but not credits or degrees) to online participants completing coursework in its \"MITx\" program, for a modest fee. The \"edX\" online platform supporting MITx was initially developed in partnership with Harvard and its analogous \"Harvardx\" initiative. The courseware platform is open source, and other universities have already joined and added their own course content. In March 2009 the MIT faculty adopted an open-access policy to make its scholarship publicly accessible online.\nMIT has its own police force. Three days after the Boston Marathon bombing of April 2013, MIT Police patrol officer Sean Collier was fatally shot by the suspects Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev, setting off a violent manhunt that shut down the campus and much of the Boston metropolitan area for a day. One week later, Collier's memorial service was attended by more than 10,000 people, in a ceremony hosted by the MIT community with thousands of police officers from the New England region and Canada. On November 25, 2013, MIT announced the creation of the Collier Medal, to be awarded annually to \"an individual or group that embodies the character and qualities that Officer Collier exhibited as a member of the MIT community and in all aspects of his life\". The announcement further stated that \"Future recipients of the award will include those whose contributions exceed the boundaries of their profession, those who have contributed to building bridges across the community, and those who consistently and selflessly perform acts of kindness\".\nIn September 2017, the school announced the creation of an artificial intelligence research lab called the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. IBM will spend $240 million over the next decade, and the lab will be staffed by MIT and IBM scientists. In October 2018 MIT announced that it would open a new Schwarzman College of Computing dedicated to the study of artificial intelligence, named after lead donor and The Blackstone Group CEO Stephen Schwarzman. The focus of the new college is to study not just AI, but interdisciplinary AI education, and how AI can be used in fields as diverse as history and biology. The cost of buildings and new faculty for the new college is expected to be $1 billion upon completion.\nThe Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) was designed and constructed by a team of scientists from California Institute of Technology, MIT, and industrial contractors, and funded by the National Science Foundation. It was designed to open the field of gravitational-wave astronomy through the detection of gravitational waves predicted by general relativity. Gravitational waves were detected for the first time by the LIGO detector in 2015. For contributions to the LIGO detector and the observation of gravitational waves, two Caltech physicists, Kip Thorne and Barry Barish, and MIT physicist Rainer Weiss won the Nobel Prize in physics in 2017. Weiss, who is also an MIT graduate, designed the laser interferometric technique, which served as the essential blueprint for the LIGO.\nIn April 2024,\u00a0MIT\u00a0students joined other campuses across the United States in protests and setting up encampments against the Gaza war. Student likened their actions to the historic protests against the American invasion of\u00a0Vietnam and MIT investments in South African apartheid; they called for ending ties to the Israeli Ministry of Defense.\nCampus.\nMIT's campus in the city of Cambridge spans approximately a mile along the north side of the Charles River basin. The campus is divided roughly in half by Massachusetts Avenue, with most dormitories and student life facilities to the west and most academic buildings to the east. The bridge closest to MIT is the Harvard Bridge, which is known for being marked off in a non-standard unit of length \u2013 the smoot.\nThe Kendall/MIT MBTA Red Line station is located on the northeastern edge of the campus, in Kendall Square. The Cambridge neighborhoods surrounding MIT are a mixture of high tech companies occupying both modern office and rehabilitated industrial buildings, as well as socio-economically diverse residential neighborhoods. In early 2016, MIT presented a development plan for Kendall Square the City of Cambridge, adding high-rise educational, retail, residential, startup incubator, and office space around the MBTA station. The MIT Museum has moved immediately adjacent to a Kendall Square subway entrance, joining the List Visual Arts Center on the eastern end of the campus.\nEach building at MIT has a number (possibly preceded by a \"W\", \"N\", \"E\", or \"NW\") designation, and most have a name as well. Typically, academic and office buildings are referred to primarily by number while residence halls are referred to by name. The organization of building numbers roughly corresponds to the order in which the buildings were built and their location relative (north, west, and east) to the original center cluster of Maclaurin buildings. Many of the buildings are connected above ground as well as through an extensive network of tunnels, providing protection from the Cambridge weather as well as a venue for roof and tunnel hacking.\nThe campus' primary energy source is natural gas. In connection with capital campaigns to expand the campus, the Institute has also extensively renovated existing buildings to improve their energy efficiency. MIT has also taken steps to reduce its environmental impact by running alternative fuel campus shuttles, subsidizing public transportation passes, constructing solar power offsets, and building a cogeneration plant to power campus electricity, heating, and cooling requirements.\nResearch facilities.\nMIT's on-campus nuclear reactor is one of the most powerful university-based nuclear reactors in the United States. The prominence of the reactor's containment building in a densely populated area has been controversial, but MIT maintains that it is well-secured.\nMIT Nano, also known as Building 12, is an interdisciplinary facility for nanoscale research. Its cleanroom and research space, visible through expansive glass facades, is the largest research facility of its kind in the nation. With a cost of US$400 million, it is also one of the costliest buildings on campus. The facility also provides state-of-the-art nanoimaging capabilities with vibration damped imaging and metrology suites sitting atop a slab of concrete underground.\nOther notable campus facilities include a pressurized wind tunnel for testing aerodynamic research, a towing tank for testing ship and ocean structure designs, and previously Alcator C-Mod, which was the largest fusion device operated by any university. MIT's campus-wide wireless network was completed in the fall of 2005 and consists of nearly 3,000 access points covering of campus.\nArchitecture.\nMIT's School of Architecture, founded in 1865 and now called the School of Architecture and Planning, was the first formal architecture program in the United States, and it has a history of commissioning progressive buildings. The first buildings constructed on the Cambridge campus, completed in 1916, are sometimes called the \"Maclaurin buildings\" after Institute president Richard Maclaurin who oversaw their construction. Designed by William Welles Bosworth, these imposing buildings were built of reinforced concrete, a first for a non-industrial \u2013 much less university \u2013 building in the US. Bosworth's design was influenced by the City Beautiful Movement of the early 1900s and features the Pantheon-esque Great Dome housing the Barker Engineering Library. The Great Dome overlooks Killian Court, where graduation ceremonies are held each year. The friezes of the limestone-clad buildings around Killian Court are engraved with the names of important scientists and philosophers. The spacious Building 7 atrium at 77 Massachusetts Avenue is regarded as the entrance to the Infinite Corridor and the rest of the campus.\nAlvar Aalto's Baker House (1947), Eero Saarinen's MIT Chapel and Kresge Auditorium (1955), and I.M. Pei's Green, Dreyfus, Landau, and Wiesner buildings represent high forms of post-war modernist architecture. More recent buildings like Frank Gehry's Stata Center (2004), Steven Holl's Simmons Hall (2002), Charles Correa's Building 46 (2005), and Fumihiko Maki's Media Lab Extension (2009) stand out among the Boston area's classical architecture and serve as examples of contemporary campus \"starchitecture\". These buildings have not always been well received; in 2010, \"The Princeton Review\" included MIT in a list of twenty schools whose campuses are \"tiny, unsightly, or both\".\nHousing.\nUndergraduates are guaranteed four-year housing in one of MIT's 11 undergraduate dormitories. Those living on campus can receive support and mentoring from live-in graduate student tutors, resident advisors, and faculty housemasters. Because housing assignments are made based on the preferences of the students themselves, diverse social atmospheres can be sustained in different living groups; for example, according to the \"Yale Daily News\" staff's \"The Insider's Guide to the Colleges, 2010\", \"The split between East Campus and West Campus is a significant characteristic of MIT. East Campus has gained a reputation as a thriving counterculture.\" MIT also has 5 dormitories for single graduate students and 2 apartment buildings on campus for married student families.\nMIT has an active Greek and co-op housing system, including thirty-six fraternities, sororities, and independent living groups (FSILGs). As of 2015[ [update]], 98% of all undergraduates lived in MIT-affiliated housing; 54% of the men participated in fraternities and 20% of the women were involved in sororities. Most FSILGs are located across the river in Back Bay near where MIT was founded, and there is also a cluster of fraternities on MIT's West Campus that face the Charles River Basin. After the 1997 alcohol-related death of Scott Krueger, a new pledge at the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity, MIT required all freshmen to live in the dormitory system starting in 2002. Because FSILGs had previously housed as many as 300 freshmen off-campus, the new policy could not be implemented until Simmons Hall opened in that year.\nIn 2013\u20132014, MIT abruptly closed and then demolished undergrad dorm Bexley Hall, citing extensive water damage that made repairs infeasible. In 2017, MIT shut down Senior House after a century of service as an undergrad dorm. That year, MIT administrators released data showing just 60% of Senior House residents had graduated in four years. Campus-wide, the four-year graduation rate is 84% (the cumulative graduation rate is significantly higher).\nOff-campus real estate.\nMIT has substantial commercial real estate holdings in Cambridge on which it pays property taxes, plus an additional voluntary payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT) on academic buildings which are legally tax-exempt. As of 2017[ [update]], it is the largest taxpayer in the city, contributing approximately 14% of the city's annual revenues. Holdings include Technology Square, parts of Kendall Square, University Park, and many properties in Cambridgeport and Area 4 neighboring the main campus. The land is held for investment purposes and potential long-term expansion.\nOrganization and administration.\nMIT is a state-chartered nonprofit corporation governed by a privately appointed board known as the MIT Corporation. The Corporation has 60\u201380 members at any time, some with fixed terms, some with life appointments, and eight who serve \"ex officio\". The Corporation approves the budget, new programs, degrees and faculty appointments, and elects a president to manage the university and preside over the Institute's faculty. The current president is Sally Kornbluth, a cell biologist and former provost at Duke University, who became MIT's eighteenth president in January 2023.\nMIT has five schools (Science, Engineering, Architecture and Planning, Management, and Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences) and one college (Schwarzman College of Computing), but no schools of law or medicine. Faculty committees have control over many areas of MIT's curriculum, research, student life, and administrative affairs, the chair of each of MIT's academic departments reports to the dean of that department's school, who in turn reports to the Provost under the President. Academic departments are also evaluated by \"Visiting Committees\", specialized bodies of Corporation members and outside experts who review the performance, activities, and needs of each department.\nMIT's endowment, real estate, and other financial assets are managed through by the MIT Investment Management Company (MITIMCo), a subsidiary of the MIT Corporation created in 2004. A minor revenue source for much of the Institute's history, the endowment's role in MIT operations has grown due to strong investment returns since the 1990s, making it one the largest U.S. university endowments. Among its holdings are a majority of shares in the audio equipment manufacturer Bose Corporation, as well as a commercial real estate portfolio in Kendall Square.\nAcademics.\nMIT is a large, highly residential, research university with a majority of enrollments in graduate and professional programs. The university has been accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges since 1929. MIT operates on a 4\u20131\u20134 academic calendar with the fall semester beginning after Labor Day and ending in mid-December, a 4-week \"Independent Activities Period\" in the month of January, and the spring semester commencing in early February and ceasing in late May.\nMIT students refer to both their majors and classes using numbers or acronyms alone. Departments and their corresponding majors are numbered in the approximate order of their foundation; for example, Civil and Environmental Engineering is Course 1, while Linguistics and Philosophy is Course 24. Students majoring in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS), the most popular department, collectively identify themselves as \"Course 6\". MIT students use a combination of the department's course number and the number assigned to the class to identify their subjects; for instance, the introductory calculus-based classical mechanics course is simply \"8.01\" (pronounced \"eight-oh-one\") at MIT.\nUndergraduate program.\nThe four-year, full-time undergraduate program maintains a balance between professional majors and those in the arts and sciences. In 2010, it was dubbed \"most selective\" by \"U.S. News\", admitting few transfer students and 4.1% of its applicants in the 2020\u20132021 admissions cycle. It is need-blind for both domestic and international applicants. MIT offers 44 undergraduate degrees across its five schools. In the 2017\u20132018 academic year, 1,045 Bachelor of Science degrees (abbreviated \"SB\") were granted, the only type of undergraduate degree MIT now awards. In the 2011 fall term, among students who had designated a major, the School of Engineering was the most popular division, enrolling 63% of students in its 19 degree programs, followed by the School of Science (29%), School of Humanities, Arts, &amp; Social Sciences (3.7%), Sloan School of Management (3.3%), and School of Architecture and Planning (2%). The largest undergraduate degree programs were in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (Course 6\u20132), Computer Science and Engineering (Course 6\u20133), Mechanical Engineering (Course 2), Physics (Course 8), and Mathematics (Course 18).\nAll undergraduates are required to complete a core curriculum called the General Institute Requirements (GIRs). The Science Requirement, generally completed during freshman year as prerequisites for classes in science and engineering majors, comprises two semesters of physics, two semesters of calculus, one semester of chemistry, and one semester of biology. There is a Laboratory Requirement, usually satisfied by an appropriate class in a course major. The Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences (HASS) Requirement consists of eight semesters of classes in the humanities, arts, and social sciences, including at least one semester from each division as well as the courses required for a designated concentration in a HASS division. Under the Communication Requirement, two of the HASS classes, plus two of the classes taken in the designated major must be \"communication-intensive\", including \"substantial instruction and practice in oral presentation\". Finally, all students are required to complete a swimming test; non-varsity athletes must also take four quarters of physical education classes.\nMost classes rely on a combination of lectures, recitations led by associate professors or graduate students, weekly problem sets (\"p-sets\"), and periodic quizzes or tests. While the pace and difficulty of MIT coursework has been compared to \"drinking from a fire hose\", the freshmen retention rate at MIT is similar to other research universities. The \"pass/no-record\" grading system relieves some pressure for first-year undergraduates. For each class taken in the fall term, freshmen transcripts will either report only that the class was passed, or otherwise not have any record of it. In the spring term, passing grades (A, B, C) appear on the transcript while non-passing grades are again not recorded. (Grading had previously been \"pass/no record\" all freshman year, but was amended for the Class of 2006 to prevent students from gaming the system by completing required major classes in their freshman year.) Also, freshmen may choose to join alternative learning communities, such as Experimental Study Group, Concourse, or Terrascope.\nMIT's curriculum encourages students to apply scientific knowledge in practical domains, an idea summarized in the institute motto of \"mens et manus\" or \"mind and hand.\" Courses emphasizes uses of engineering knowledge in arenas like product design competitions and control design. In 1969, Margaret MacVicar founded the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP) to enable undergraduates to collaborate directly with faculty members and researchers. Students join or initiate research projects (\"UROPs\") for academic credit, pay, or on a volunteer basis through postings on the UROP website or by contacting faculty members directly. A substantial majority of undergraduates participate. Students often become published, file patent applications, and/or launch start-up companies based upon their experience in UROPs. The program has been widely emulated at other U.S. universities.\nIn 1970, the then-Dean of Institute Relations, Benson R. Snyder, published \"The Hidden Curriculum,\" arguing that education at MIT was often slighted in favor of following a set of unwritten expectations and that graduating with good grades was more often the product of figuring out the system rather than a solid education. The successful student, according to Snyder, was the one who was able to discern which of the formal requirements were to be ignored in favor of which unstated norms. For example, organized student groups had compiled \"course bibles\"\u2014collections of problem-set and examination questions and answers for later students to use as references. This sort of gamesmanship, Snyder argued, hindered development of a creative intellect and contributed to student discontent and unrest.\nGraduate program.\nMIT's graduate program has high coexistence with the undergraduate program, and many courses are taken by qualified students at both levels. MIT offers a comprehensive doctoral program with degrees in the humanities, social sciences, and STEM fields as well as professional degrees, including the Master of Business Administration (MBA). The Institute offers graduate programs leading to academic degrees such as the Master of Science (which is abbreviated as MS at MIT), various Engineer's Degrees, Doctor of Philosophy (PhD), and Doctor of Science (DSc) and interdisciplinary graduate programs such as the MD-PhD (with Harvard Medical School) and a joint program in oceanography with Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.\nAdmission to graduate programs is decentralized; applicants apply directly to the department or degree program. More than 90% of doctoral students are supported by fellowships, research assistantships (RAs), or teaching assistantships (TAs).\nRankings.\nMIT places among the top five in many overall rankings of universities (see table right) and rankings based on students' revealed preferences. For several years, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\", the QS World University Rankings, and the Academic Ranking of World Universities have ranked MIT's School of Engineering first, as did the 1995 National Research Council report. In the same lists, MIT's strongest showings apart from in engineering are in computer science, the natural sciences, business, architecture, economics, linguistics, mathematics, and, to a lesser extent, political science and philosophy.\nTimes Higher Education has recognized MIT as one of the world's \"six super brands\" on its \"World Reputation Rankings\", along with Berkeley, Cambridge, Harvard, Oxford, and Stanford. In 2019, it was ranked #3 among the universities around the world by SCImago Institutions Rankings. In 2017, the Times Higher Education World University Rankings also rated MIT the #2 university for arts and humanities. MIT was ranked #7 in 2015 and #6 in 2017 of the Nature Index Annual Tables, which measure the largest contributors to papers published in 82 leading journals. Georgetown University researchers ranked MIT #3 in the US for 20-year return on investment.\nCollaborations.\nThe university historically pioneered research and training collaborations between academia, industry and government.\u00a0In 1946, President Compton, Harvard Business School professor Georges Doriot, and Massachusetts Investor Trust chairman Merrill Grisswold founded American Research and Development Corporation, the first American venture-capital firm.\u00a0In 1948, Compton established the MIT Industrial Liaison Program. Throughout the late 1980s and early 1990s, American politicians and business leaders accused MIT and other universities of contributing to a declining economy by transferring taxpayer-funded research and technology to international \u2013 especially Japanese \u2013 firms that were competing with struggling American businesses. On the other hand, MIT's extensive collaboration with the federal government on research projects has led to several MIT leaders serving as presidential scientific advisers since 1940. MIT established a Washington Office in 1991 to continue effective lobbying for research funding and national science policy.\nThe US Justice Department began an investigation in 1989, and in 1991 filed an antitrust suit against MIT, the eight Ivy League colleges, and eleven other institutions for allegedly engaging in price-fixing during their annual \"Overlap Meetings\", which were held to prevent bidding wars over promising prospective students from consuming funds for need-based scholarships. While the Ivy League institutions settled, MIT contested the charges, arguing that the practice was not anti-competitive because it ensured the availability of aid for the greatest number of students. MIT ultimately prevailed when the Justice Department dropped the case in 1994.\nMIT's proximity to Harvard University (\"the other school up the river\") has led to a substantial number of research collaborations such as the Harvard\u2013MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology and the Broad Institute. In addition, students at the two schools can cross-register for credits toward their own school's degrees without any additional fees. A cross-registration program between MIT and Wellesley College has also existed since 1969, and in 2002 the Cambridge\u2013MIT Institute launched an undergraduate exchange program between MIT and the University of Cambridge. MIT also has a long-term partnership with Imperial College London, for both student exchanges and research collaboration. More modest cross-registration programs have been established with Boston University, Brandeis University, Tufts University, Massachusetts College of Art, and the School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.\nMIT maintains substantial research and faculty ties with independent research organizations in the Boston area, such as the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. Ongoing international research and educational collaborations include the Amsterdam Institute for Advanced Metropolitan Solutions (AMS Institute), Singapore-MIT Alliance, MIT-Politecnico di Milano, MIT-Zaragoza International Logistics Program, and projects in other countries through the MIT International Science and Technology Initiatives (MISTI) program.\nThe mass-market magazine \"Technology Review\" is published by MIT through a subsidiary company, as is a special edition that also serves as an alumni magazine. The MIT Press is a major university press, publishing over 200 books and 30 journals annually, emphasizing science and technology as well as arts, architecture, new media, current events, and social issues.\nMIT Microphotonics Center and PhotonDelta founded the global roadmap for integrated photonics: Integrated Photonics Systems Roadmap \u2013 International (IPSR-I). The first edition has been published in 2020. The roadmap is an amalgamation of two previously independent roadmaps: the IPSR roadmap of MIT Microphotonics Center and AIM Photonics in the United States, and the WTMF (World Technology Mapping Forum) of PhotonDelta in Europe. In 2022, Open Philanthropy donated $13,277,348 to MIT to study potential risks from AI.\nLibraries, collections, and museums.\nThe MIT library system consists of five subject libraries: Barker (Engineering), Dewey (Economics), Hayden (Humanities and Science), Lewis (Music), and Rotch (Arts and Architecture). There are also various specialized libraries and archives. The libraries contain more than 2.9 million printed volumes, 2.4 million microforms, 49,000 print or electronic journal subscriptions, and 670 reference databases. The past decade has seen a trend of increased focus on digital over print resources in the libraries. Notable collections include the Lewis Music Library with an emphasis on 20th and 21st-century music and electronic music, the List Visual Arts Center's rotating exhibitions of contemporary art, and the Compton Gallery's cross-disciplinary exhibitions. MIT allocates a percentage of the budget for all new construction and renovation to commission and support its extensive public art and outdoor sculpture collection.\nThe MIT Museum was founded in 1971 and collects, preserves, and exhibits artifacts significant to the culture and history of MIT. The museum now engages in significant educational outreach programs for the general public, including the annual Cambridge Science Festival, the first celebration of this kind in the United States. Since 2005, its official mission has been, \"to engage the wider community with MIT's science, technology and other areas of scholarship in ways that will best serve the nation and the world in the 21st century\".\nResearch.\nMIT was elected to the Association of American Universities in 1934 and is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\"; research expenditures totaled $952 million in 2017. The federal government was the largest source of sponsored research, with the Department of Health and Human Services granting $255.9 million, Department of Defense $97.5 million, Department of Energy $65.8 million, National Science Foundation $61.4 million, and NASA $27.4 million. MIT employs approximately 1300 researchers in addition to faculty. In 2011, MIT faculty and researchers disclosed 632 inventions, were issued 153 patents, earned $85.4 million in cash income, and received $69.6 million in royalties. Through programs like the Deshpande Center, MIT faculty leverage their research and discoveries into multi-million-dollar commercial ventures.\nIn electronics, magnetic-core memory, radar, single-electron transistors, and inertial guidance controls were invented or substantially developed by MIT researchers. Harold Eugene Edgerton was a pioneer in high-speed photography and sonar. Claude E. Shannon developed much of modern information theory and discovered the application of Boolean logic to digital circuit design theory. In the domain of computer science, MIT faculty and researchers made fundamental contributions to cybernetics, artificial intelligence, computer languages, machine learning, robotics, and cryptography. At least nine Turing Award laureates and seven recipients of the Draper Prize in engineering have been or are currently associated with MIT.\nCurrent and previous physics faculty have won eight Nobel Prizes, four ICTP Dirac Medals, and three Wolf Prizes predominantly for their contributions to subatomic and quantum theory. Members of the chemistry department have been awarded three Nobel Prizes and one Wolf Prize for the discovery of novel syntheses and methods. MIT biologists have been awarded six Nobel Prizes for their contributions to genetics, immunology, oncology, and molecular biology. Professor Eric Lander was one of the principal leaders of the Human Genome Project. Positronium atoms, synthetic penicillin, synthetic self-replicating molecules, and the genetic bases for Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (also known as ALS or Lou Gehrig's disease) and Huntington's disease were first discovered at MIT. Jerome Lettvin transformed the study of cognitive science with his paper \"What the frog's eye tells the frog's brain\". Researchers developed a system to convert MRI scans into 3D printed physical models.\nIn the domain of humanities, arts, and social sciences, as of October 2019 MIT economists have been awarded seven Nobel Prizes and nine John Bates Clark Medals. Linguists Noam Chomsky and Morris Halle authored seminal texts on generative grammar and phonology. The MIT Media Lab, founded in 1985 within the School of Architecture and Planning and known for its unconventional research, has been home to influential researchers such as constructivist educator and Logo creator Seymour Papert.\nSpanning many of the above fields, MacArthur Fellowships (the so-called \"Genius Grants\") have been awarded to 50 people associated with MIT. Five Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning writers currently work at or have retired from MIT. Four current or former faculty are members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters.\nAllegations of research misconduct or improprieties have received substantial press coverage. Professor David Baltimore, a Nobel Laureate, became embroiled in a misconduct investigation starting in 1986 that led to Congressional hearings in 1991. Professor Ted Postol has accused the MIT administration since 2000 of attempting to whitewash potential research misconduct at the Lincoln Lab facility involving a ballistic missile defense test, though a final investigation into the matter has not been completed. Associate Professor Luk Van Parijs was dismissed in 2005 following allegations of scientific misconduct and found guilty of the same by the United States Office of Research Integrity in 2009.\nIn 2019, Clarivate Analytics named 54 members of MIT's faculty to its list of \"Highly Cited Researchers\". That number places MIT eighth among the world's universities.\nSummer program.\nMassachusetts Institute of Technology offers the MIT Introduction to Engineering and Science (MITES), a six-week summer program for rising high school seniors. Its purpose is to expose students from underserved and underrepresented backgrounds to the fields of science and engineering. The program also aims to foster an interest in these subject matters and prepare students for the pressures and lifestyle of college life.\nMITES was founded in 1974 as the MITE (Minority Introduction to Engineering) Program with the purpose of increasing the number of people from underrepresented backgrounds in the engineering profession. It started out as a two-week intensive program, and later evolved into what is now a six-week program for 60-80 students.\nDiscoveries and innovation.\nCompanies and entrepreneurship.\nMIT alumni and faculty have founded numerous companies, some of which are shown below:\nTraditions and student activities.\nThe faculty and student body place a high value on meritocracy and on technical proficiency. MIT has never awarded an honorary degree, nor does it award athletic scholarships, \"ad eundem\" degrees, or Latin honors upon graduation. However, MIT has twice awarded honorary professorships: to Winston Churchill in 1949 and Salman Rushdie in 1993.\nMany upperclass students and alumni wear a large, heavy, distinctive class ring known as the \"Brass Rat\". Originally created in 1929, the ring's official name is the \"Standard Technology Ring\". The undergraduate ring design (a separate graduate student version exists as well) varies slightly from year to year to reflect the unique character of the MIT experience for that class, but always features a three-piece design, with the MIT seal and the class year each appearing on a separate face, flanking a large rectangular bezel bearing an image of a beaver. The initialism IHTFP, representing the informal school motto \"I Hate This Fucking Place\" and jocularly euphemized as \"I Have Truly Found Paradise\", \"Institute Has The Finest Professors\", \"Institute of Hacks, TomFoolery and Pranks\", \"It's Hard to Fondle Penguins\", and other variations, has occasionally been featured on the ring given its historical prominence in student culture.\nCaltech Rivalry.\nMIT also shares a well-known rivalry with the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), stemming from both institutions' reputations as two of the highest ranked and most highly recognized science and engineering schools in the world. The rivalry is an unusual college rivalry given its focus on academics and pranks instead of sports, and due to the geographic distance between the two (their campuses are separated by about 2580 miles and are on opposite coasts of the United States). In 2005, Caltech students pranked MIT's Campus Preview Weekend by distributing t-shirts that read \"MIT\" on the front, and \"...because not everyone can go to Caltech\" on the back. Additionally, the word Massachusetts in the \"Massachusetts Institute of Technology\" engraving on the exterior of the Lobby 7 dome was covered with a banner so that it read \"That Other Institute of Technology\". In 2006, MIT retaliated by posing as contractors and stealing the 1.7-ton, 130-year-old Fleming cannon, a Caltech landmark. The cannon was relocated to Cambridge, where it was displayed in front of the Green Building during the 2006 Campus Preview Weekend. In September 2010, MIT students unsuccessfully tried to place a life-sized model of the TARDIS time machine from the \"Doctor Who\" (1963\u2013present) television series on top of Baxter Hall at Caltech. A few months later, Caltech students collaborated to help MIT students place the TARDIS on top of their originally planned destination. The rivalry has continued, most recently in 2014, when a group of Caltech students gave out mugs sporting the MIT logo on the front and the words \"The Institute of Technology\" on the back. When heated, the mugs turned orange and read, \"Caltech, The Hotter Institute of Technology\".\nActivities.\nMIT has over 500 recognized student activity groups, including a campus radio station, \"The Tech\" student newspaper, an annual entrepreneurship competition, a crime club, and weekly screenings of popular films by the Lecture Series Committee. Less traditional activities include the \"world's largest open-shelf collection of science fiction\" in English, a model railroad club, and a vibrant folk dance scene. Students, faculty, and staff are involved in over 50 educational outreach and public service programs through the MIT Museum, Edgerton Center, and MIT Public Service Center.\nFraternities and sororities provide a base of activities in addition to housing. Approximately 1,000 undergrads, 48% of men and 30% of women, participate in one of several dozen Greek Life men's, women's and co-ed chapters on the campus.\nThe Independent Activities Period is a four-week-long \"term\" offering hundreds of optional classes, lectures, demonstrations, and other activities throughout the month of January between the Fall and Spring semesters. Some of the most popular recurring IAP activities are Autonomous Robot Design (course 6.270), Robocraft Programming (6.370), and MasLab competitions, the annual \"mystery hunt\", and Charm School. More than 250 students pursue externships annually at companies in the US and abroad.\nMany MIT students also engage in \"hacking\", which encompasses both the physical exploration of areas that are generally off-limits (such as rooftops and steam tunnels), as well as elaborate practical jokes. Examples of high-profile hacks have included the abduction of Caltech's cannon, reconstructing a Wright Flyer atop the Great Dome, and adorning the John Harvard statue with the Master Chief's Mj\u00f6lnir Helmet.\nAthletics.\nMIT sponsors 31 varsity sports and has one of the three broadest NCAA Division III athletic programs. MIT participates in the NCAA's Division III, and the New England Women's and Men's Athletic Conference. It also participates in NCAA's Division I Patriot League for women's crew, and the Collegiate Water Polo Association (CWPA) for Men's Water Polo. Men's crew competes outside the NCAA in the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges (EARC).\nMIT's intercollegiate sports teams, called the Engineers, have won 22 Team National Championships and 42 Individual National Championships. MIT is the all-time Division III leader in producing Academic All-Americas (302) and ranks second across all NCAA Divisions, behind only the University of Nebraska\u2013Lincoln. MIT Athletes won 13 Elite 90 awards and ranks first among NCAA Division III programs, and third among all divisions. In April 2009, budget cuts led to MIT eliminating eight of its 41 sports, including the mixed men's and women's teams in alpine skiing and pistol; separate teams for men and women in ice hockey and gymnastics; and men's programs in golf and wrestling.\nPeople.\nStudents.\nMIT enrolled 4,602 undergraduates and 6,972 graduate students in 2018\u20132019. Undergraduate and graduate students came from all 50 US states as well as from 115 foreign countries.\nMIT received 33,240 applications for admission to the undergraduate Class of 2025: it admitted 1,365 (4.1 percent). In 2019, 29,114 applications were received for graduate and advanced degree programs across all departments; 3,670 were admitted (12.6 percent) and 2,312 enrolled (63 percent). In August 2024, after the U.S. Supreme Court overruled race-based affirmative action in \"Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard\" (2023), the university reported that for the class of 2028, Black and Latino student enrollment decreased from previous averages to 5 and 11 percent, respectively, while Asian American enrollment increased to 47 percent.\nUndergraduate tuition and fees for 2019\u20132020 was $53,790 for nine months. 59% of students were awarded a need-based MIT scholarship. Graduate tuition and fees for 2019\u20132020 was also $53,790 for nine months, and summer tuition was $17,800. Financial support for graduate students are provided in large part by individual departments. They include fellowships, traineeships, teaching and research assistantships, and loans. The annual increase in expenses had led to a student tradition (dating back to the 1960s) of tongue-in-cheek \"tuition riots\".\nMIT has been nominally co-educational since admitting Ellen Swallow Richards in 1870. Richards also became the first female member of MIT's faculty, specializing in sanitary chemistry. Female students remained a small minority prior to the completion of the first wing of a women's dormitory, McCormick Hall, in 1963. Between 1993 and 2009 the proportion of women rose from 34 percent to 45 percent of undergraduates and from 20 percent to 31 percent of graduate students. As of 2009[ [update]], women outnumbered men in Biology, Brain &amp; Cognitive Sciences, Architecture, Urban Planning, and Biological Engineering.\nFaculty and staff.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], MIT had 1,090 faculty members. Faculty are responsible for lecturing classes, for advising both graduate and undergraduate students, and for sitting on academic committees, as well as for conducting original research. Between 1964 and 2009 a total of seventeen faculty and staff members affiliated with MIT won Nobel Prizes (thirteen of them in the latter 25 years). As of October 2020, 37 MIT faculty members, past or present, have won Nobel Prizes, the majority in Economics or Physics.\nAs of October\u00a02013[ [update]], current faculty and teaching staff included 67 Guggenheim Fellows, 6 Fulbright Scholars, and 22 MacArthur Fellows. Faculty members who have made extraordinary contributions to their research field as well as the MIT community are granted appointments as Institute Professors for the remainder of their tenures. Susan Hockfield, a molecular neurobiologist, served as MIT's president from 2004 to 2012. She was the first woman to hold the post.\nMIT faculty members have often been recruited to lead other colleges and universities. Founding faculty-member Charles W. Eliot became president of Harvard University in 1869, a post he would hold for 40 years, during which he had influence both on American higher education and on secondary education. MIT alumnus and faculty member George Ellery Hale played a central role in the development of the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), and other faculty members have been key founders of Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering in nearby Needham, Massachusetts.\nAs of 2014[ [update]] former provost Robert A. Brown served as president of Boston University; former provost Mark Wrighton is chancellor of Washington University in St. Louis; former associate provost Alice Gast is president of Lehigh University; and former professor Suh Nam-pyo is president of KAIST. Former dean of the School of Science Robert J. Birgeneau was the chancellor of the University of California, Berkeley (2004\u20132013); former professor John Maeda was president of Rhode Island School of Design (RISD, 2008\u20132013); former professor David Baltimore was president of Caltech (1997\u20132006); and MIT alumnus and former assistant professor Hans Mark served as chancellor of the University of Texas system (1984\u20131992).\nIn addition, faculty members have been recruited to lead governmental agencies; for example, former professor Marcia McNutt is president of the National Academy of Sciences, urban studies professor Xavier de Souza Briggs served as the associate director of the White House Office of Management and Budget, and biology professor Eric Lander was a co-chair of the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. In 2013, faculty member Ernest Moniz was nominated by President Obama and later confirmed as United States Secretary of Energy. Former professor Hans Mark served as Secretary of the Air Force from 1979 to 1981. Alumna and Institute Professor Sheila Widnall served as Secretary of the Air Force between 1993 and 1997, making her the first female Secretary of the Air Force and first woman to lead an entire branch of the US military in the Department of Defense. A 1999 report, met by promises of change by President Charles Vest, found that senior female faculty in the School of Science were often marginalized, and in return for equal professional accomplishments received reduced \"salary, space, awards, resources, and response to outside offers\".\nAs of 2017[ [update]], MIT was the second-largest employer in the city of Cambridge. Based on feedback from employees, MIT was ranked No. 7 as a place to work, among US colleges and universities as of \u00a02013[ [update]]. Surveys cited a \"smart\", \"creative\", \"friendly\" environment, noting that the work-life balance tilts towards a \"strong work ethic\" but complaining about \"low pay\" compared to an industry position.\nNotable alumni.\nMany of MIT's over 120,000 alumni have achieved considerable success in scientific research, public service, education, and business. As of October\u00a02020[ [update]], 41 MIT alumni have won Nobel Prizes, 48 have been selected as Rhodes Scholars, 61 have been selected as Marshall Scholars, and 3 have been selected as Mitchell Scholars.\nAlumni in United States politics and public service include former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Ben Bernanke, former MA-1 Representative John Olver, former CA-13 Representative Pete Stark, KY-4 Representative Thomas Massie, California Senator Alex Padilla, and former National Economic Council chairman Lawrence H. Summers.\nMIT alumni have founded or co-founded many notable companies, such as Intel, McDonnell Douglas, Texas Instruments, 3Com, Qualcomm, Bose, Raytheon, Apotex, Koch Industries, Rockwell International, Genentech, Dropbox, and Campbell Soup. According to the British newspaper \"The Guardian\", \"a survey of living MIT alumni found that they have formed 25,800 companies, employing more than three million people including about a quarter of the workforce of Silicon Valley. Those firms collectively generate global revenues of about $1.9 trillion (\u00a31.2 trillion) a year\". If the companies founded by MIT alumni were a country, they would have the 11th-highest GDP of any country in the world.\nMore than one third of the United States' crewed spaceflights have included MIT-educated astronauts, a contribution exceeding that of any university excluding the United States service academies. Of the 12 people who have set foot on the Moon as of 2019[ [update]], four graduated from MIT (among them Apollo 11 Lunar Module Pilot Buzz Aldrin). Alumnus and former faculty member Qian Xuesen led the Chinese nuclear-weapons program and became instrumental in Chinese rocket-program.\nNoted alumni in non-scientific fields include children's book author Hugh Lofting, sculptor Daniel Chester French, guitarist Tom Scholz of the band Boston, the British \"BBC\" and \"ITN\" correspondent and political advisor David Walter, \"The New York Times\" columnist and Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Krugman, \"The Bell Curve\" author Charles Murray, and United States Supreme Court building architect Cass Gilbert. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Also see the http:// maintained by MIT's http:// and Written Works in MIT in popular culture.\"\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18880", "revid": "50292890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18880", "title": "Monopolistic competition", "text": "Imperfect competition of differentiated products that are not perfect substitutes\nMonopolistic competition is a type of imperfect competition such that there are many producers competing against each other but selling products that are differentiated from one another (e.g., branding, quality) and hence not perfect substitutes. For monopolistic competition, a company takes the prices charged by its rivals as given and ignores the effect of its own prices on the prices of other companies. If this happens in the presence of a coercive government, monopolistic competition may evolve into government-granted monopoly. Unlike perfect competition, the company may maintain spare capacity. Models of monopolistic competition are often used to model industries. Textbook examples of industries with market structures similar to monopolistic competition include restaurants, cereals, clothing, shoes, and service industries in large cities. The earliest developer of the theory of monopolistic competition is Edward Hastings Chamberlin, who wrote a pioneering book on the subject, \"Theory of Monopolistic Competition\" (1933). Joan Robinson's book \"The Economics of Imperfect Competition\" presents a comparable theme of distinguishing perfect from imperfect competition. Further work on monopolistic competition was performed by Dixit and Stiglitz who created the Dixit-Stiglitz model which has proved applicable used in the subtopics of international trade theory, macroeconomics and economic geography.\nMonopolistically competitive markets have the characteristics following:\nThe long-run characteristics of a monopolistically competitive market are almost the same as a perfectly competitive market. Two differences between the two are that monopolistic competition produces heterogeneous products and that monopolistic competition involves a great deal of non-price competition, which is based on subtle product differentiation. A company making profits in the short run will nonetheless only break even in the long run because demand will decrease and average total cost will increase, meaning that in the long run, a monopolistically competitive company will make zero economic profit. This illustrates the amount of influence the company has over the market; because of brand loyalty, it can raise its prices without losing all of its customers. This means that an individual company's demand curve is downward sloping, in contrast to perfect competition, which has a perfectly elastic demand schedule.\nCharacteristics.\nThere are eight characteristics of monopolistic competition (MC):\nProduct differentiation.\nMC companies sell products that have real or perceived non-price differences. Examples of these differences could include physical aspects of the product, location from which it sells the product or intangible aspects of the product, among others. However, the differences are not so great as to eliminate other goods as substitutes. In technical terms, the cross price elasticity of demand between goods in such a market is large and positive. MC goods are best described as close but imperfect substitutes. The goods perform the same basic functions but have differences in qualities such as type, style, quality, reputation, appearance, and location that tend to distinguish them from each other. For example, the basic function of motor vehicles is the same\u2014to move people and objects from point to point in reasonable comfort and safety. Yet there are many different types of motor vehicles such as motor scooters, motor cycles, trucks and cars, and many variations even within these categories.\nMany companies.\nThere are many companies in each MC product group and many companies on the side lines prepared to enter the market. A product group is a \"collection of similar products\". The fact that there are \"many companies\" means that each company has a small market share. This gives each MC company the freedom to set prices without engaging in strategic decision making regarding the prices of other companies (no mutual dependence) and each company's actions effect the market negligibly. For example, a company could reduce prices and increase sales without fear that its actions will prompt retaliatory responses from competitors.\nThe number of companies that an MC market structure will support at market equilibrium depends on factors such as fixed costs, economies of scale, and the degree of product differentiation. For example, the greater the fixed costs, the fewer companies the market will support.\nFreedom of entry and exit.\nLike perfect competition, with monopolistic competition also, the companies can enter or exit freely. The companies will enter when the existing companies are making super-normal profits. With the entry of new companies, the supply would increase which would reduce the price and hence the existing companies will be left only with normal profits. Similarly, if the existing companies are sustaining losses, some of the marginal companies will quit. It will reduce the supply due to which price would rise and the existing companies will be left only with normal profit.\nIndependent decision-making.\nEach MC company independently sets the terms of exchange for its product. The company gives no consideration to what effect its decision may have on its competitors. The theory is that any action will have such a negligible effect on the overall market demand that an MC company can act without fear of prompting heightened competition. In other words, each company feels free to set prices as if it were a monopoly rather than an oligopoly.\nMarket power.\nMC companies have some degree of market power, although relatively little. Market power means that the company has control over the terms and conditions of exchange. All MC companies are price makers. An MC companies can increase its prices without losing all its customers. The company can also decrease prices without triggering a potentially ruinous price competition with other companies. The source of an MC company's market power is not barriers to entry since they are low. Rather, an MC company has market power because it has relatively few competitors, those competitors do not engage in strategic decision making and the companies sells differentiated product. Market power also means that an MC company faces a downward sloping demand curve. In the long run, the demand curve is very elastic, meaning that it is sensitive to price changes, although it is not completely \"flat\". In the short run, economic profit is positive, but it approaches zero in the long run.\nImperfect information.\nNo other sellers or buyers have complete market information, like market demand or market supply.\nInefficiency.\nThere are two sources of inefficiency in the MC market structure. The first source of inefficiency is that, at its optimum output, the company charges a price that exceeds marginal costs. The MC company maximises profits where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. Since the MC company's demand curve is downwards-sloping, the company will charge a price that exceeds marginal costs. The monopoly power possessed by a MC company means that at its profit-maximising level of production, there will be a net loss of consumer (and producer) surplus. The second source of inefficiency is the fact that MC companies operate with excess capacity. That is that the MC company's profit-maximising output is less than the output associated with minimum average cost. Both an MC and PC company will operate at a point where demand or price equals average cost. For a PC company, this equilibrium condition occurs where the perfectly elastic demand curve equals minimum average cost. An MC company's demand curve is not flat but is downward-sloping. Thus, the demand curve will be tangential to the long-run average cost curve at a point to the left of its minimum. The result is excess capacity.\nProblems.\nMonopolistically-competitive companies are inefficient, it is usually the case that the costs of regulating prices for products sold in monopolistic competition exceed the benefits of such regulation. A monopolistically-competitive company might be said to be marginally inefficient because the company produces at an output where average total cost is not a minimum. A monopolistically competitive market is a productively inefficient market structure because firms do not produce at the minimum of their average total cost (ATC) curve. Monopolistically-competitive markets are also allocative-inefficient, as the company charges prices that exceed marginal cost. Product differentiation increases total utility by better meeting people's wants than homogenous products in a perfectly competitive market.\nAnother concern is that monopolistic competition fosters advertising. There are two main ways to conceive how advertising works under a monopolistic competition framework. Advertising can cause either a company's perceived demand curve to become more inelastic or demand for the company's product to increase. In either case, a successful advertising campaign may allow a company to sell a greater quantity or to charge a higher price, or both, and thus increase its profits. This allows the creation of brand names. Advertising induces customers into spending more on products because of the name associated with them rather than because of rational factors. Defenders of advertising dispute this, arguing that brand names can represent a guarantee of quality and that advertising helps reduce the cost to consumers of weighing the trade-offs of numerous competing brands. There are unique information and information processing costs associated with selecting a brand in a monopolistically competitive environment. In a monopoly market, the consumer is faced with a single brand, making information gathering relatively inexpensive. In a perfectly competitive industry, the consumer is faced with many brands, but because the brands are virtually identical information gathering is also relatively inexpensive. In a monopolistically competitive market, the consumer must collect and process information on a large number of different brands to be able to select the best of them. In many cases, the cost of gathering information necessary to selecting the best brand can exceed the benefit of consuming the best brand instead of a randomly selected brand. The result is that the consumer is confused. Some brands gain prestige value and can extract an additional price for that.\nEvidence suggests that consumers use information obtained from advertising not only to assess the single brand advertised, but also to infer the possible existence of brands that the consumer has, heretofore, not observed, as well as to infer consumer satisfaction with brands similar to the advertised brand.\nExamples.\nIn many markets, such as toothpaste, soap, air conditioning, smartphones and toilet paper, food, producers practice product differentiation by altering the physical composition of products, using special packaging, or simply claiming to have superior products based on brand images or advertising.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18881", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18881", "title": "Mathematical induction", "text": "Form of mathematical proof\nMathematical induction is a method for proving that a statement formula_1 is true for every natural number formula_2, that is, that the infinitely many cases formula_3\u2009 all hold. This is done by first proving a simple case, then also showing that if we assume the claim is true for a given case, then the next case is also true. Informal metaphors help to explain this technique, such as falling dominoes or climbing a ladder:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mathematical induction proves that we can climb as high as we like on a ladder, by proving that we can climb onto the bottom rung (the basis) and that from each rung we can climb up to the next one (the step).\u2014\u200a\nA proof by induction consists of two cases. The first, the base case, proves the statement for formula_4 without assuming any knowledge of other cases. The second case, the induction step, proves that \"if\" the statement holds for any given case formula_5, \"then\" it must also hold for the next case formula_6. These two steps establish that the statement holds for every natural number formula_2. The base case does not necessarily begin with formula_4, but often with formula_9, and possibly with any fixed natural number formula_10, establishing the truth of the statement for all natural numbers formula_11.\nThe method can be extended to prove statements about more general well-founded structures, such as trees; this generalization, known as structural induction, is used in mathematical logic and computer science. Mathematical induction in this extended sense is closely related to recursion. Mathematical induction is an inference rule used in formal proofs, and is the foundation of most correctness proofs for computer programs.\nDespite its name, mathematical induction differs fundamentally from inductive reasoning as used in philosophy, in which the examination of many cases results in a probable conclusion. The mathematical method examines infinitely many cases to prove a general statement, but it does so by a finite chain of deductive reasoning involving the variable formula_2, which can take infinitely many values. The result is a rigorous proof of the statement, not an assertion of its probability.\nHistory.\nIn 370 BC, Plato's Parmenides may have contained traces of an early example of an implicit inductive proof, however, the earliest implicit proof by mathematical induction was written by al-Karaji around 1000 AD, who applied it to arithmetic sequences to prove the binomial theorem and properties of Pascal's triangle. Whilst the original work was lost, it was later referenced by Al-Samawal al-Maghribi in his treatise \"al-Bahir fi'l-jabr (The Brilliant in Algebra)\" in around 1150 AD.\nKatz says in his history of mathematics &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Another important idea introduced by al-Karaji and continued by al-Samaw'al and others was that of an inductive argument for dealing with certain arithmetic sequences. Thus al-Karaji used such an argument to prove the result on the sums of integral cubes already known to Aryabhata [...] Al-Karaji did not, however, state a general result for arbitrary \"n\". He stated his theorem for the particular integer 10 [...] His proof, nevertheless, was clearly designed to be extendable to any other integer. [...] Al-Karaji's argument includes in essence the two basic components of a modern argument by induction, namely the truth of the statement for \"n\" = 1 (1 = 13) and the deriving of the truth for \"n\" = \"k\" from that of \"n\" = \"k\" \u2212 1. Of course, this second component is not explicit since, in some sense, al-Karaji's argument is in reverse; this is, he starts from \"n\" = 10 and goes down to 1 rather than proceeding upward. Nevertheless, his argument in \"al-Fakhri\" is the earliest extant proof of the sum formula for integral cubes.\nIn India, early implicit proofs by mathematical induction appear in Bhaskara's \"cyclic method\".\nNone of these ancient mathematicians, however, explicitly stated the induction hypothesis. Another similar case (contrary to what Vacca has written, as Freudenthal carefully showed) was that of Francesco Maurolico in his \"Arithmeticorum libri duo\" (1575), who used the technique to prove that the sum of the first n odd integers is \"n\"2.\nThe earliest rigorous use of induction was by Gersonides (1288\u20131344). The first explicit formulation of the principle of induction was given by Pascal in his \"Trait\u00e9 du triangle arithm\u00e9tique\" (1665). Another Frenchman, Fermat, made ample use of a related principle: indirect proof by infinite descent.\nThe induction hypothesis was also employed by the Swiss Jakob Bernoulli, and from then on it became well known. The modern formal treatment of the principle came only in the 19th century, with George Boole, Augustus De Morgan, Charles Sanders Peirce, Giuseppe Peano, and Richard Dedekind.\nDescription.\nThe simplest and most common form of mathematical induction infers that a statement involving a natural number n (that is, an integer \"n\" \u2265 0 or 1) holds for all values of n. The proof consists of two steps:\nThe hypothesis in the induction step, that the statement holds for a particular n, is called the induction hypothesis or inductive hypothesis. To prove the induction step, one assumes the induction hypothesis for n and then uses this assumption to prove that the statement holds for \"n\" +\u20091.\nAuthors who prefer to define natural numbers to begin at 0 use that value in the base case; those who define natural numbers to begin at 1 use that value.\nExamples.\nSum of consecutive natural numbers.\nMathematical induction can be used to prove the following statement for all natural numbers formula_13:\nformula_14\nThis states a general formula for the sum of the natural numbers less than or equal to a given number; in fact an infinite sequence of statements: formula_15, formula_16, formula_17, etc.\nProposition. For every formula_18, we have that formula_19\nProof. Let formula_1 be the statement formula_19 We give a proof by induction on formula_2.\n\"Base case:\" Show that the statement holds for the smallest natural number \"n\" = 0.\nformula_23 is clearly true: formula_24\n\"Induction step:\" Show that for every formula_25, if formula_26 holds, then formula_27 also holds.\nAssume the induction hypothesis that for a particular formula_28, the single case formula_29 holds, meaning formula_26 is true:\nformula_31\nIt follows that:\nformula_32\nAlgebraically, the right hand side simplifies as:\nformula_33\nEquating the extreme left hand and right hand sides, we deduce that:formula_34 That is, the statement formula_27 also holds true, establishing the induction step.\n\"Conclusion:\" Since both the base case and the induction step have been proved as true, by mathematical induction the statement formula_1 holds for every natural number formula_13. Q.E.D.\nA trigonometric inequality.\nInduction is often used to prove inequalities. As an example, we prove that formula_38 for any real number formula_39 and natural number formula_2.\nAt first glance, it may appear that a more general version, formula_38 for any \"real\" numbers formula_42, could be proven without induction; but the case formula_43 shows it may be false for non-integer values of formula_2. This suggests we examine the statement specifically for \"natural\" values of formula_2, and induction is the readiest tool.\nProposition. For any formula_46 and formula_47, formula_38.\nProof. Fix an arbitrary real number formula_39, and let formula_1 be the statement formula_38. We induce on formula_2.\n\"Base case:\" The calculation formula_53 verifies formula_23.\n\"Induction step:\" We show the implication formula_55 for any natural number formula_28. Assume the induction hypothesis: for a given value formula_57, the single case formula_26 is true. Using the angle addition formula and the triangle inequality, we deduce:\nformula_59\nThe inequality between the extreme left-hand and right-hand quantities shows that formula_27 is true, which completes the induction step.\n\"Conclusion:\" The proposition formula_1 holds for all natural numbers formula_62\u00a0 Q.E.D.\nVariants.\nIn practice, proofs by induction are often structured differently, depending on the exact nature of the property to be proven.\nAll variants of induction are special cases of transfinite induction; see below.\nBase case other than 0 or 1.\nIf one wishes to prove a statement, not for all natural numbers, but only for all numbers n greater than or equal to a certain number b, then the proof by induction consists of the following:\nThis can be used, for example, to show that 2\"n\" \u2265 \"n\" + 5 for \"n\" \u2265 3.\nIn this way, one can prove that some statement \"P\"(\"n\") holds for all \"n\" \u2265 1, or even for all \"n\" \u2265 \u22125. This form of mathematical induction is actually a special case of the previous form, because if the statement to be proved is \"P\"(\"n\") then proving it with these two rules is equivalent with proving \"P\"(\"n\" + \"b\") for all natural numbers n with an induction base case 0.\nExample: forming dollar amounts by coins.\nAssume an infinite supply of 4- and 5-dollar coins. Induction can be used to prove that any whole amount of dollars greater than or equal to 12 can be formed by a combination of such coins. Let \"S\"(\"k\") denote the statement \"k dollars can be formed by a combination of 4- and 5-dollar coins\". The proof that \"S\"(\"k\") is true for all \"k\" \u2265 12 can then be achieved by induction on k as follows:\n\"Base case:\" Showing that \"S\"(\"k\") holds for \"k\" = 12 is simple: take three 4-dollar coins.\n\"Induction step:\" Given that \"S\"(\"k\") holds for some value of \"k\" \u2265 12 (\"induction hypothesis\"), prove that \"S\"(\"k\" +\u20091) holds, too. Assume \"S\"(\"k\") is true for some arbitrary \"k\" \u2265 12. If there is a solution for k dollars that includes at least one 4-dollar coin, replace it by a 5-dollar coin to make \"k\" +\u20091 dollars. Otherwise, if only 5-dollar coins are used, k must be a multiple of 5 and so at least 15; but then we can replace three 5-dollar coins by four 4-dollar coins to make \"k\" +\u20091 dollars. In each case, \"S\"(\"k\" +\u20091) is true.\nTherefore, by the principle of induction, \"S\"(\"k\") holds for all \"k\" \u2265 12, and the proof is complete.\nIn this example, although \"S\"(\"k\") also holds for formula_63, the above proof cannot be modified to replace the minimum amount of 12 dollar to any lower value m. For \"m\" = 11, the base case is actually false; for \"m\" = 10, the second case in the induction step (replacing three 5- by four 4-dollar coins) will not work; let alone for even lower m.\nInduction on more than one counter.\nIt is sometimes desirable to prove a statement involving two natural numbers, n and m, by iterating the induction process. That is, one proves a base case and an induction step for n, and in each of those proves a base case and an induction step for m. See, for example, the proof of commutativity accompanying \"addition of natural numbers\". More complicated arguments involving three or more counters are also possible.\nInfinite descent.\nThe method of infinite descent is a variation of mathematical induction which was used by Pierre de Fermat. It is used to show that some statement \"Q\"(\"n\") is false for all natural numbers n. Its traditional form consists of showing that if \"Q\"(\"n\") is true for some natural number n, it also holds for some strictly smaller natural number m. Because there are no infinite decreasing sequences of natural numbers, this situation would be impossible, thereby showing (by contradiction) that \"Q\"(\"n\") cannot be true for any n.\nThe validity of this method can be verified from the usual principle of mathematical induction. Using mathematical induction on the statement \"P\"(\"n\") defined as \"\"Q\"(\"m\") is false for all natural numbers m less than or equal to n\", it follows that \"P\"(\"n\") holds for all n, which means that \"Q\"(\"n\") is false for every natural number n.\nLimited mathematical induction.\nIf one wishes to prove that a property \"P\" holds for all natural numbers less than or equal to a fixed N, proving that \"P\" satisfies the following conditions suffices:\nPrefix induction.\nThe most common form of proof by mathematical induction requires proving in the induction step that\nformula_64\nwhereupon the induction principle \"automates\" n applications of this step in getting from \"P\"(0) to \"P\"(\"n\"). This could be called \"predecessor induction\" because each step proves something about a number from something about that number's predecessor.\nA variant of interest in computational complexity is \"prefix induction\", in which one proves the following statement in the induction step:\nformula_65\nor equivalently\nformula_66\nThe induction principle then \"automates\" log2\u2009\"n\" applications of this inference in getting from \"P\"(0) to \"P\"(\"n\"). In fact, it is called \"prefix induction\" because each step proves something about a number from something about the \"prefix\" of that number \u2014 as formed by truncating the low bit of its binary representation. It can also be viewed as an application of traditional induction on the length of that binary representation.\nIf traditional predecessor induction is interpreted computationally as an n-step loop, then prefix induction would correspond to a log-n-step loop. Because of that, proofs using prefix induction are \"more feasibly constructive\" than proofs using predecessor induction.\nPredecessor induction can trivially simulate prefix induction on the same statement. Prefix induction can simulate predecessor induction, but only at the cost of making the statement more syntactically complex (adding a bounded universal quantifier), so the interesting results relating prefix induction to polynomial-time computation depend on excluding unbounded quantifiers entirely, and limiting the alternation of bounded universal and existential quantifiers allowed in the statement.\nOne can take the idea a step further: one must prove\nformula_67\nwhereupon the induction principle \"automates\" log log \"n\" applications of this inference in getting from \"P\"(0) to \"P\"(\"n\"). This form of induction has been used, analogously, to study log-time parallel computation.\nComplete (strong) induction.\nAnother variant, called complete induction, course of values induction or strong induction (in contrast to which the basic form of induction is sometimes known as weak induction), makes the induction step easier to prove by using a stronger hypothesis: one proves the statement formula_68 under the assumption that formula_1 holds for \"all\" natural numbers formula_2 less than formula_71; by contrast, the basic form only assumes formula_72. The name \"strong induction\" does not mean that this method can prove more than \"weak induction\", but merely refers to the stronger hypothesis used in the induction step.\nIn fact, it can be shown that the two methods are actually equivalent, as explained below. In this form of complete induction, one still has to prove the base case, formula_23, and it may even be necessary to prove extra-base cases such as formula_74 before the general argument applies, as in the example below of the Fibonacci number formula_75.\nAlthough the form just described requires one to prove the base case, this is unnecessary if one can prove formula_72 (assuming formula_1 for all lower formula_2) for all formula_79. This is a special case of transfinite induction as described below, although it is no longer equivalent to ordinary induction. In this form the base case is subsumed by the case formula_80, where formula_23 is proved with no other formula_1 assumed; this case may need to be handled separately, but sometimes the same argument applies for formula_80 and formula_84, making the proof simpler and more elegant.\nIn this method, however, it is vital to ensure that the proof of formula_72 does not implicitly assume that formula_84, e.g. by saying \"choose an arbitrary formula_87\", or by assuming that a set of m elements has an element.\nEquivalence with ordinary induction.\nComplete induction is equivalent to ordinary mathematical induction as described above, in the sense that a proof by one method can be transformed into a proof by the other. Suppose there is a proof of formula_1 by complete induction. Then, this proof can be transformed into an ordinary induction proof by assuming a stronger inductive hypothesis. Let formula_89 be the statement \"formula_72 holds for all formula_91 such that formula_92\"\u2014this becomes the inductive hypothesis for ordinary induction. We can then show formula_93 and formula_94 for formula_95 assuming only formula_89 and show that formula_89 implies formula_1.\nIf, on the other hand, formula_1 had been proven by ordinary induction, the proof would already effectively be one by complete induction: formula_23 is proved in the base case, using no assumptions, and formula_101 is proved in the induction step, in which one may assume all earlier cases but need only use the case formula_1.\nExample: Fibonacci numbers.\nComplete induction is most useful when several instances of the inductive hypothesis are required for each induction step. For example, complete induction can be used to show that\nformula_103\nwhere formula_104 is the n-th Fibonacci number, and formula_105 (the golden ratio) and formula_106 are the roots of the polynomial formula_107. By using the fact that formula_108 for each formula_47, the identity above can be verified by direct calculation for formula_110 if one assumes that it already holds for both formula_111 and formula_112. To complete the proof, the identity must be verified in the two base cases: formula_4 and formula_114.\nExample: prime factorization.\nAnother proof by complete induction uses the hypothesis that the statement holds for \"all\" smaller formula_2 more thoroughly. Consider the statement that \"every natural number greater than 1 is a product of (one or more) prime numbers\", which is the \"existence\" part of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. For proving the induction step, the induction hypothesis is that for a given formula_116 the statement holds for all smaller formula_117. If formula_91 is prime then it is certainly a product of primes, and if not, then by definition it is a product: formula_119, where neither of the factors is equal to 1; hence neither is equal to formula_91, and so both are greater than 1 and smaller than formula_91. The induction hypothesis now applies to formula_122 and formula_123, so each one is a product of primes. Thus formula_91 is a product of products of primes, and hence by extension a product of primes itself.\nExample: dollar amounts revisited.\nWe shall look to prove the same example as , this time with \"strong induction\". The statement remains the same:\nformula_125\nHowever, there will be slight differences in the structure and the assumptions of the proof, starting with the extended base case.\nProof.\n\"Base case:\" Show that formula_126 holds for formula_127.\nformula_128\nThe base case holds.\n\"Induction step:\" Given some formula_129, assume formula_130 holds for all formula_91 with formula_132. Prove that formula_133 holds.\nChoosing formula_134, and observing that formula_135 shows that formula_136 holds, by the inductive hypothesis. That is, the sum formula_137 can be formed by some combination of formula_138 and formula_139 dollar coins. Then, simply adding a formula_138 dollar coin to that combination yields the sum formula_141. That is, formula_133 holds. Q.E.D.\nForward-backward induction.\nSometimes, it is more convenient to deduce backwards, proving the statement for formula_143, given its validity for formula_2. However, proving the validity of the statement for no single number suffices to establish the base case; instead, one needs to prove the statement for an infinite subset of the natural numbers. For example, Augustin Louis Cauchy first used forward (regular) induction to prove the\ninequality of arithmetic and geometric means for all powers of 2, and then used backwards induction to show it for all natural numbers.\nExample of error in the induction step.\nThe induction step must be proved for all values of n. To illustrate this, Joel E. Cohen proposed the following argument, which purports to prove by mathematical induction that all horses are of the same color:\n\"Base case:\" in a set of only \"one\" horse, there is only one color.\n\"Induction step:\" assume as induction hypothesis that within any set of formula_2 horses, there is only one color. Now look at any set of formula_146 horses. Number them: formula_147. Consider the sets formula_148 and formula_149. Each is a set of only formula_2 horses, therefore within each there is only one color. But the two sets overlap, so there must be only one color among all formula_146 horses.\nThe base case formula_152 is trivial, and the induction step is correct in all cases formula_153. However, the argument used in the induction step is incorrect for formula_154, because the statement that \"the two sets overlap\" is false for formula_155 and formula_156.\nFormalization.\nIn second-order logic, one can write down the \"axiom of induction\" as follows:\nformula_157\nwhere \"P\"(\u00b7) is a variable for predicates involving one natural number and k and n are variables for natural numbers.\nIn words, the base case \"P\"(0) and the induction step (namely, that the induction hypothesis \"P\"(\"k\") implies \"P\"(\"k\" +\u20091)) together imply that \"P\"(\"n\") for any natural number n. The axiom of induction asserts the validity of inferring that \"P\"(\"n\") holds for any natural number n from the base case and the induction step.\nThe first quantifier in the axiom ranges over \"predicates\" rather than over individual numbers. This is a second-order quantifier, which means that this axiom is stated in second-order logic. Axiomatizing arithmetic induction in first-order logic requires an axiom schema containing a separate axiom for each possible predicate. The article Peano axioms contains further discussion of this issue.\nThe axiom of structural induction for the natural numbers was first formulated by Peano, who used it to specify the natural numbers together with the following four other axioms:\nIn first-order ZFC set theory, quantification over predicates is not allowed, but one can still express induction by quantification over sets:\nformula_158\nA may be read as a set representing a proposition, and containing natural numbers, for which the proposition holds. This is not an axiom, but a theorem, given that natural numbers are defined in the language of ZFC set theory by axioms, analogous to Peano's. See construction of the natural numbers using the axiom of infinity and axiom schema of specification.\nTransfinite induction.\nOne variation of the principle of complete induction can be generalized for statements about elements of any well-founded set, that is, a set with an irreflexive relation &lt; that contains no infinite descending chains. Every set representing an ordinal number is well-founded, the set of natural numbers is one of them.\nApplied to a well-founded set, transfinite induction can be formulated as a single step. To prove that a statement \"P\"(\"n\") holds for each ordinal number:\nThis form of induction, when applied to a set of ordinal numbers (which form a well-ordered and hence well-founded class), is called \"transfinite induction\". It is an important proof technique in set theory, topology and other fields.\nProofs by transfinite induction typically distinguish three cases:\nStrictly speaking, it is not necessary in transfinite induction to prove a base case, because it is a vacuous special case of the proposition that if \"P\" is true of all \"n\" &lt; \"m\", then \"P\" is true of m. It is vacuously true precisely because there are no values of \"n\" &lt; \"m\" that could serve as counterexamples. So the special cases are special cases of the general case.\nRelationship to the well-ordering principle.\nThe principle of mathematical induction is usually stated as an axiom of the natural numbers; see Peano axioms. It is strictly stronger than the well-ordering principle in the context of the other Peano axioms. Suppose the following:\nIt can then be proved that induction, given the above-listed axioms, implies the well-ordering principle. The following proof uses complete induction and the first and fourth axioms.\nProof. Suppose there exists a non-empty set, S, of natural numbers that has no least element. Let \"P\"(\"n\") be the assertion that n is not in S. Then \"P\"(0) is true, for if it were false then 0 is the least element of S. Furthermore, let n be a natural number, and suppose \"P\"(\"m\") is true for all natural numbers m less than \"n\" +\u20091. Then if \"P\"(\"n\" +\u20091) is false \"n\" +\u20091 is in S, thus being a minimal element in S, a contradiction. Thus \"P\"(\"n\" +\u20091) is true. Therefore, by the complete induction principle, \"P\"(\"n\") holds for all natural numbers n; so S is empty, a contradiction. Q.E.D.\nOn the other hand, the set formula_159, shown in the picture, is well-ordered by the lexicographic order.\nMoreover, except for the induction axiom, it satisfies all Peano axioms, where Peano's constant 0 is interpreted as the pair (0,\u20090), and Peano's \"successor\" function is defined on pairs by succ(\"x\", \"n\") = (\"x\", \"n\" +\u20091) for all formula_160 and formula_47.\nAs an example for the violation of the induction axiom, define the predicate \"P\"(\"x\", \"n\") as (\"x\", \"n\") = (0, 0) or (\"x\", \"n\") = succ(\"y\", \"m\") for some formula_162 and formula_163. Then the base case \"P\"(0,\u20090) is trivially true, and so is the induction step: if \"P\"(\"x\", \"n\"), then \"P\"(succ(\"x\", \"n\")). However, \"P\" is not true for all pairs in the set, since \"P\"(1,0) is false.\nPeano's axioms with the induction principle uniquely model the natural numbers. Replacing the induction principle with the well-ordering principle allows for more exotic models that fulfill all the axioms.\nIt is mistakenly printed in several books and sources that the well-ordering principle is equivalent to the induction axiom. In the context of the other Peano axioms, this is not the case, but in the context of other axioms, they are equivalent; specifically, the well-ordering principle implies the induction axiom in the context of the first two above listed axioms and\nA common mistake in many erroneous proofs is to assume that \"n\" \u2212\u20091 is a unique and well-defined natural number, a property which is not implied by the other Peano axioms.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18882", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18882", "title": "Matrices", "text": ""}
{"id": "18883", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18883", "title": "MonopolyGame", "text": ""}
{"id": "18884", "revid": "50245681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18884", "title": "Matrix", "text": "Matrix (pl.: matrices or matrixes) or MATRIX may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18885", "revid": "9757211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18885", "title": "Morton Downey Jr.", "text": "American television talk show host (1932\u20132001)\n Morton Downey Jr. (born Sean Morton Downey; December 9, 1932 \u2013 March 12, 2001) was an American television talk show host and actor who pioneered the \"trash TV\" format in the late 1980s on his program \"The Morton Downey Jr. Show\".\nEarly life.\nDowney's roots were in show business; his father, Morton Downey, was a popular singer, and his mother, Barbara Bennett, was a stage and film actress and singer and dancer. His aunts included Hollywood film stars Constance and Joan Bennett, and his maternal grandfather was matin\u00e9e idol Richard Bennett. His wealthy family spent their summers next door to the Kennedy compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. Downey attended New York University.\nCareer.\nDowney worked as a program director and announcer at radio station WPOP in Hartford, Connecticut, in the 1950s. He went on to work as a disc jockey, sometimes using the moniker \"Doc\" Downey, in various markets around the U.S., including Phoenix (KRIZ), Miami (WFUN), Kansas City (KUDL), San Diego (KDEO) and Seattle (KJR). He had to resign from WFUN after drawing ire from the FCC for announcing a competing disc jockey's home phone number on the air and insulting his wife. Like his father, Downey pursued a career in music, recording in both pop and country styles. He sang on a few records and then began to write songs, several of which were popular in the 1950s and 1960s. In 1958, he recorded \"Boulevard of Broken Dreams\", which he sang on national television on a set that resembled a dark street with one street light. In 1981, \"Green Eyed Girl\" charted on the \"Billboard\" country chart, peaking at No. 95.\nIn the 1980s, Downey became a talk show host at KFBK-AM in Sacramento, California, where he employed an abrasive style. He was fired in 1984, and was subsequently replaced by Rush Limbaugh. He also had a stint on WMAQ-AM in Chicago where he unsuccessfully tried to get other on air radio personalities to submit to drug testing. Downey's largest effect on American culture came from his popular, yet short-lived, syndicated late-1980s television talk show, \"The Morton Downey Jr. Show\".\nAnti-abortion activism.\nOn January 22, 1980, Downey, a devoted anti-abortionist, hosted the California State Rally for Life at the invitation of the California ProLife Council and United Students for Life. At that time, he was also running for President of the United States, as a Democrat. The United Students for Life, at California State University, Sacramento helped organize his California presidential rallies. Downey worked to help promote anti-abortion candidates in California and around the country.\nTelevision.\nDowney headed to Secaucus, New Jersey, where his television program \"The Morton Downey Jr. Show\" was taped. Starting as a local program on New York\u2013New Jersey superstation WWOR-TV in October 1987, it expanded into national syndication in early 1988. The program featured screaming matches among Downey, his guests, and audience members. Using a large silver bowl for an ashtray, he would chainsmoke during the show and blow smoke in his guests' faces. Downey's fans became known as \"Loudmouths\", patterned after the studio lecterns decorated with gaping cartoon mouths, from which Downey's guests would go head-to-head against each other on their respective issues.\nOn a few occasions, his attempts to provoke outbursts on his show resulted in physical confrontations. One such incident occurred on a 1988 show taped at the Apollo Theater, involving Al Sharpton and CORE National Chairman Roy Innis. The exchange between the two men culminated in Innis shoving Sharpton and knocking him to the floor, and Downey intervening to separate the pair.\nBecause of the controversial format and content of the show, distributor MCA Television had problems selling the show to a number of stations and advertisers. Even Downey's affiliates, many of which were low-rated independent television stations in small to medium markets, were so fearful of advertiser and viewer backlash that they would air one or even two local disclaimers during the broadcast.\nDuring one controversial episode Downey introduced his gay brother, Tony Downey, to his studio audience and informed them Tony was HIV positive. During the episode Downey stated he was afraid his audience would abandon him if they knew he had a gay brother, but then said he did not care.\n\"The Washington Post\" wrote about him, \"Suppose a maniac got hold of a talk show. Or need we suppose?\"\nDavid Letterman said, \"I'm always amazed at what people will fall for. We see this every ten or twelve years, an attempt at this, and I guess from that standpoint I don't quite understand why everybody's falling over backwards over the guy.\"\nCelebrity, cancellation, and bankruptcy.\nThe success of the show made Downey a pop culture celebrity, leading to appearances on \"Saturday Night Live\" in 1988, WrestleMania V in 1989 in which he traded insults with Roddy Piper and Brother Love on \"Piper's Pit\", and later roles in movies such as \"Predator 2\" and \"\". He was also cast in several television roles, often playing tabloid TV hosts or other obnoxious media types. Downey notably starred in the \"Tales from the Crypt\" episode \"Television Terror\" which utilized several scenes shot by characters within the story, a format which became popular in horror films a decade later with the found-footage genre. In 1993, on the Canadian crime-fighting series \"Counterstrike\", Downey portrayed Monroe Park, host of the controversial news-talk show \"The Raw Truth\", which he uses to slander Senator David Carmichael (Stephen Young) who dies on an icy road while being chased by a journalist named Betty, played by Downey's wife Lori Krebs.\nIn 1989, Downey released an album of songs based on his show entitled \"Morton Downey Jr. Sings\". The album's single, \"Zip It!\" (a catch-phrase from the TV show, used to quiet an irate guest), became a surprise hit on some college radio stations. However, over the course of the 1988\u201389 television season, his TV show suffered a decline in viewership, resulting in many markets downgrading its time slot; even flagship station WWOR moved Downey's program from its original 9:00 p.m. slot to 11:30 p.m. in the fall of 1988. Beginning in January 1989, the time slot immediately following Downey's program was given to the then-new \"Arsenio Hall Show\". Following Hall's strong early ratings, however, the two series swapped time slots several weeks later, thus relegating Downey to 12:30 a.m. in the number-one television market. \nIn late April 1989, Downey was involved in an incident in a San Francisco International Airport restroom in which he claimed to have been attacked by neo-Nazis who painted a swastika on his face and attempted to shave his head. Some inconsistencies in Downey's account (e.g., the swastika was painted in reverse, suggesting that Downey had drawn it himself in a mirror), and the failure of the police to find supportive evidence, led many to suspect the incident was a hoax and a ploy for attention. In July 1989, his show was canceled, with the owners of the show announcing that the last episode had been taped on June 30, and that no new shows would air after September 15, 1989.\nAt the time of its cancellation, the show was airing on a total of 70 stations across the country, and its advertisers had been reduced primarily to \"direct-response\" ads (such as 900 chat-line and phone sex numbers). In February 1990, Downey filed for bankruptcy in the US Bankruptcy Court for the District of New Jersey.\nLater career.\nIn 1990, Downey resurfaced on CNBC with an interview program called \"Showdown\", which was followed by three attempted talk radio comebacks: first in 1992 on Washington, D.C. radio station WWRC; then in 1993 on Dallas radio station KGBS, where he would scream insults at his callers. He was also hired as the station's VP of Operations. The following year, he returned to CNBC with a short-lived television show, \"Downey\", which was also carried by some broadcast stations; in one episode, Downey claimed to have had a psychic communication with O. J. Simpson's murdered ex-wife, Nicole Brown Simpson.\nHis third\u2014and final\u2014attempt at a talk radio comeback occurred in 1997 on Cleveland radio station WTAM in a late evening time slot. It marked his return to the Cleveland market, where Downey had been a host for crosstown radio station WERE in the early 1980s, prior to joining KFBK. This stint came shortly after the surgery for lung cancer that removed one of his lungs. At WTAM, Downey abandoned the confrontational schtick of his TV and previous radio shows, and conducted this program in a much more conversational and jovial manner.\nOn August 30, 1997, Downey quit his WTAM show to focus on pursuing legal action against Howard Stern. Downey had accused Stern of spreading rumors that he had resumed his smoking habit, to which publicist Les Schecter retorted, \"He hasn't picked up a cigarette.\" His replacement was former WERE host Rick Gilmour.\nFollowing his death, news reports and obituaries incorrectly (according to the \"Orange County Register\") credited him as the composer of \"Wipe Out.\" As of 2008, Downey's official website (and others) continue to make this claim. Prior to Downey's death, \"Spin\" in April 1989 had identified the \"Wipe Out\" authorship as a myth.\nControversies.\nIn 1984, at KFBK radio, Downey used the word \"Chinaman\" while telling a joke. His use of the word upset portions of the sizable Asian community in Sacramento. One Asian-American city councilman called for an apology and pressured the station for Downey's resignation. Downey refused to apologize and was forced to resign.\nDowney was sued for allegedly appropriating the words and music to his theme song from two songwriters. He was sued for $40 million after bringing then-stripper Kellie Everts onto the show and calling her a \"slut\", a \"pig\", a \"hooker\", and a \"tramp\", saying she had venereal diseases, and banging his pelvis against hers.\nIn April 1988, he was arraigned on criminal charges for allegedly attacking a gay guest on his show, in a never-aired segment. In another lawsuit, he was accused of slandering a newscaster (a former colleague), and of indecently exposing himself to her and slapping her. Downey punched Stuttering John during an interview done for \"The Howard Stern Show\", while also shouting verbal insults at John, referring to him as an \"uneducated slob\". The situation then began to evolve into a brawl between the two until Downey had to be pulled off of John by security; the entire incident was caught on camera. When an \"Inside Edition\" camera crew approached Downey in 1989 to question him about his involvement in an alleged business scam, Downey grabbed the boom mike and struck the soundman's head with it.\nIn his later years, Downey expressed remorse for some of the extreme theatrics of his TV show, as well as various incidents outside the studio, including the \"Inside Edition\" confrontation. However, he also said his show was of a higher quality than and not as \"sleazy\" as Jerry Springer's show.\nPersonal life.\nDowney was married four times and had four children from three of those marriages. With wife Helen, he had daughter, Melissa; with Joan, he had daughters, Tracey and Kelli; and, with fourth wife Lori Krebs, he had daughter, Seanna Micaela. He and Lori met when she appeared as a dancer in a show he attended in Atlantic City. According to Terry Pluto's book, \"Loose Balls\", Downey (going by Sean at the time) was one of the owners of the New Orleans Buccaneers basketball team in the American Basketball Association in the late 1960s. He was also president and co-founder of the proposed World Baseball Association in 1974.\nDeath.\nIn June 1996, while being treated for pneumonia, Downey was diagnosed with lung cancer and had part of his right lung removed. His views on tobacco use changed substantially, going from a one-time member of the National Smokers Alliance to a staunch anti-smoking activist. He continued to speak against smoking until his death from lung cancer and pneumonia on March 12, 2001.\nAfter being diagnosed with lung cancer, he commented: { He also blamed tobacco companies for lying to consumers about cigarettes.\nLegacy.\nIn 1998, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to him.\nReleased in 2012, the documentary film \"\" touches upon Downey's upbringing and formative years in radio and politics before launching into the history of \"The Morton Downey Jr. Show\" and Downey's influence on trash TV. The film also looks at Downey's relationship with Al Sharpton and other important 80s figures.\nThe Super Mario character, Morton Koopa Jr. was named after him. The character first made his debut in the 1988 game Super Mario Bros. 3 as a member of the Koopalings, who are boss characters who work for Bowser, the main antagonist.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18886", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18886", "title": "List of male singles tennis players", "text": "This is a list of top international male singles tennis players, both past and present.\nIt includes players who have met one or more of the following criteria in singles:\nPlayers who have won at least one Grand Slam singles title or have been ranked world no.\u00a01 in singles are in bold. Players who are still active on the tour are in \"italics\".\nList.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18887", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18887", "title": "Metaphilosophy", "text": "Investigation of the nature of philosophy\nMetaphilosophy, sometimes called the philosophy of philosophy, is \"the investigation of the nature of philosophy\". Its subject matter includes the aims of philosophy, the boundaries of philosophy, and its methods. Thus, while philosophy characteristically inquires into the nature of being, the reality of objects, the possibility of knowledge, the nature of truth, and so on, metaphilosophy is the self-reflective inquiry into the nature, aims, and methods of the activity that makes these kinds of inquiries, by asking what \"is\" philosophy itself, what sorts of questions it should ask, how it might pose and answer them, and what it can achieve in doing so. It is considered by some to be a subject prior and preparatory to philosophy, while others see it as inherently a part of philosophy, or automatically a part of philosophy while others adopt some combination of these views.\nThe interest in metaphilosophy led to the establishment of the journal \"Metaphilosophy\" in January 1970.\nMany sub-disciplines of philosophy have their own branch of 'metaphilosophy', examples being meta-aesthetics, meta-epistemology, meta-ethics, and metametaphysics (meta-ontology).\nAlthough the \"term\" metaphilosophy and explicit attention to metaphilosophy as a specific domain within philosophy arose in the 20th century, the topic is likely as old as philosophy itself, and can be traced back at least as far as the works of Ancient Greeks and Ancient Indian Nyaya.\nRelationship to philosophy.\nSome philosophers consider metaphilosophy to be a subject apart from philosophy, above or beyond it, while others object to that idea. Timothy Williamson argues that the philosophy of philosophy is \"automatically part of philosophy\", as is the philosophy of anything else. Ludwig Wittgenstein argued that there is no \"second-order philosophy\" in the same way an explanation of the spelling of \"spelling\" is not second-order spelling, or orthography of the word 'orthography' is not second-order orthography. Nicholas Bunnin and Jiyuan Yu write that the separation of first- from second-order study has lost popularity as philosophers find it hard to observe the distinction. As evidenced by these contrasting opinions, debate persists as to whether the evaluation of the nature of philosophy is 'second-order philosophy' or simply 'plain philosophy'.\nMany philosophers have expressed doubts over the value of metaphilosophy. Among them is Gilbert Ryle: \"preoccupation with questions about methods tends to distract us from prosecuting the methods themselves. We run as a rule, worse, not better, if we think a lot about our feet. So let us ... not speak of it all but just do it.\"\nTerminology.\nThe designations \"metaphilosophy\" and \"philosophy of philosophy\" have a variety of meanings, sometimes taken to be synonyms, and sometimes seen as distinct.\nMorris Lazerowitz claims to have coined the term 'metaphilosophy' around 1940 and used it in print in 1942. Lazerowitz proposed that metaphilosophy is 'the investigation of the nature of philosophy'. Earlier uses have been found in translations from French. The term is derived from Greek word \"meta\" \u03bc\u03b5\u03c4\u03ac (\"after\", \"beyond\", \"with\") and \"philosoph\u00eda\" \u03c6\u03b9\u03bb\u03bf\u03c3\u03bf\u03c6\u03af\u03b1 (\"love of wisdom\").\nThe term 'metaphilosophy' is used by Paul Moser in the sense of a 'second-order' or more fundamental undertaking than philosophy itself, in the manner suggested by Charles Griswold:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Paul K. Moser\u2014\u200a\nSome other philosophers treat the prefix \"meta\" as simply meaning '\"about...\"', rather than as referring to a metatheoretical 'second-order' form of philosophy, among them Rescher and Double. Others, such as Williamson, prefer the term \"'philosophy of philosophy\"' instead of 'metaphilosophy' as it avoids the connotation of a 'second-order' discipline that looks down on philosophy, and instead denotes something that is a part of it. Joll suggests that to take metaphilosophy as 'the application of the methods of philosophy to philosophy itself' is too vague, while the view that sees metaphilosophy as a 'second-order' or more abstract discipline, outside philosophy, \"is narrow and tendentious\".\nIn the analytic tradition, the term \"metaphilosophy\" is mostly used to tag commenting and research on previous works as opposed to original contributions towards solving philosophical problems.\nWritings.\nLudwig Wittgenstein wrote about the nature of philosophical puzzles and philosophical understanding. He suggested philosophical errors arose from confusions about the nature of philosophical inquiry. \nC. D. Broad distinguished Critical from Speculative philosophy in his \"The Subject-matter of Philosophy, and its Relations to the special Sciences\", in \"Introduction to Scientific Thought\", 1923. Curt Ducasse, in \"Philosophy as a Science\", examines several views of the nature of philosophy, and concludes that philosophy has a distinct subject matter: appraisals. Ducasse's view has been among the first to be described as 'metaphilosophy'.\nHenri Lefebvre in \"M\u00e9taphilosophie\" (1965) argued, from a Marxian standpoint, in favor of an \"ontological break\", as a necessary methodological approach for critical social theory (while criticizing Louis Althusser's \"epistemological break\" with subjective Marxism, which represented a fundamental theoretical tool for the school of Marxist structuralism).\nPaul Moser writes that typical metaphilosophical discussion includes determining the conditions under which a claim can be said to be a philosophical one. He regards meta-ethics, the study of ethics, to be a form of metaphilosophy, as well as meta-epistemology, the study of epistemology.\nTopics.\nMany sub-disciplines of philosophy have their own branch of 'metaphilosophy'. However, some topics within 'metaphilosophy' cut across the various subdivisions of philosophy to consider fundamentals important to all its sub-disciplines. \nAims.\nSome philosophers (e.g. existentialists, pragmatists) think philosophy is ultimately a practical discipline that should help us lead meaningful lives by showing us who we are, how we relate to the world around us and what we should do. Others (e.g. analytic philosophers) see philosophy as a technical, formal, and entirely theoretical discipline, with goals such as \"the disinterested pursuit of knowledge for its own sake\". Other proposed goals of philosophy include discovering the absolutely fundamental reason of everything it investigates, making explicit the nature and significance of ordinary and scientific beliefs, and unifying and transcending the insights given by science and religion. Others proposed that philosophy is a complex discipline because it has 4 or 6 different dimensions.\nBoundaries.\nDefining philosophy and its boundaries is itself problematic; Nigel Warburton has called it \"notoriously difficult\". There is no straightforward definition, and most interesting definitions are controversial. As Bertrand Russell wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Bertrand Russell\u2014\u200a\nWhile there is some agreement that philosophy involves general or fundamental topics, there is no clear agreement about a series of demarcation issues, including:\nMethods.\nPhilosophical method (or philosophical methodology) is the study of how to do philosophy. A common view among philosophers is that philosophy is distinguished by the ways that philosophers follow in addressing philosophical questions. There is not just one method that philosophers use to answer philosophical questions.\nC.D. Broad classifies philosophy into two methods, he distinguished between critical philosophy and speculative philosophy. He described critical philosophy as analysing \"unanalysed concepts in daily life and in science\" and then \"expos[ing] them to every objection that we can think of\". While speculative philosophy's role is to \"take over all aspects of human experience, to reflect upon them, and to try to think out a view of Reality as a whole which shall do justice to all of them\".\nRecently, some philosophers have cast doubt about intuition as a basic tool in philosophical inquiry, from Socrates up to contemporary philosophy of language. In \"Rethinking Intuition\" various thinkers discard intuition as a valid source of knowledge and thereby call into question 'a priori' philosophy. Experimental philosophy is a form of philosophical inquiry that makes at least partial use of empirical research\u2014especially \"opinion polling\"\u2014in order to address persistent philosophical questions. This is in contrast with the methods found in analytic philosophy, whereby some say a philosopher will sometimes begin by appealing to his or her intuitions on an issue and then form an argument with those intuitions as premises. However, disagreement about what experimental philosophy can accomplish is widespread and several philosophers have offered criticisms. One claim is that the empirical data gathered by experimental philosophers can have an indirect effect on philosophical questions by allowing for a better understanding of the underlying psychological processes which lead to philosophical intuitions. Some analytic philosophers like Timothy Williamson have rejected such a move against 'armchair' philosophy\u2013i.e., philosophical inquiry that is undergirded by intuition\u2013by construing 'intuition' (which they believe to be a misnomer) as merely referring to common cognitive faculties: If one is calling into question 'intuition', one is, they would say, harboring a skeptical attitude towards common cognitive faculties\u2013a consequence that seems philosophically unappealing. For Williamson, instances of intuition are instances of our cognitive faculties processing counterfactuals (or subjunctive conditionals) that are specific to the thought experiment or example in question.\nProgress.\nA prominent question in metaphilosophy is whether philosophical progress occurs and, moreover, whether such progress in philosophy is even possible.\nDavid Chalmers divides inquiry into philosophical progress in metaphilosophy into three questions.\nLudwig Wittgenstein, in Culture and Value remarked, \"Philosophy hasn't made any progress? - If somebody scratches the spot where he has an itch, do we have to see some progress?...And can't this reaction to an irritation continue in the same way for a long time before the cure for an itching is discovered?\".\nAccording to Hilary Putnam philosophy is more adept at showing people that specific ideas or arguments are wrong than that specific ideas or arguments are right.\nThe work of David Lewis has been the subject of a quantitative analysis conducted by philosopher Benj Hellie in order to study his rate of philosophical progress. According to Hellie, Lewis\u2019s most significant breakthroughs only started to occur during the midpoint of Lewis\u2019s philosophical career, after transitioning from framing a descriptive science of mind and meaning to focusing on metaphysics. Hellie then argues that future philosophers can learn much about Lewis\u2019s right and wrong steps in order to maximize philosophical breakthroughs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18888", "revid": "5959737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18888", "title": "Mandolin", "text": "Musical instrument in the lute family\nA mandolin (, ; literally \"small mandola\") is a stringed musical instrument in the lute family and is generally plucked with a pick. It most commonly has four courses of doubled strings tuned in unison, thus giving a total of eight strings. A variety of string types are used, with steel strings being the most common and usually the least expensive. The courses are typically tuned in an interval of perfect fifths, with the same tuning as a violin (G3, D4, A4, E5). Also, like the violin, it is the soprano member of a family that includes the mandola, octave mandolin, mandocello and mandobass.\nThere are many styles of mandolin, but the three most common types are the \"Neapolitan\" or \"round-backed\" mandolin, the \"archtop\" mandolin and the \"flat-backed\" mandolin. The round-backed version has a deep bottom, constructed of strips of wood, glued together into a bowl. The \"archtop\", also known as the \"carved-top\" mandolin, has an arched top and a shallower, arched back both carved out of wood. The flat-backed mandolin uses thin sheets of wood for the body, braced on the inside for strength in a similar manner to a guitar. Each style of instrument has its own sound quality and is associated with particular styles of music. Neapolitan mandolins feature prominently in European classical music and in traditional music like the Andean music of Peru. Archtop instruments are common in American folk music and bluegrass music. Flat-backed instruments are commonly used in Irish, British, and Brazilian folk music, and Mexican \"estudiantinas\".\nOther mandolin variations differ primarily in the number of strings and include four-string models (tuned in fifths) such as the Brescian and Cremonese; six-string types (tuned in fourths) such as the Milanese, Lombard, and Sicilian; six-course instruments of 12 strings (two strings per course) such as the Genoese; and the tricordia, with four triple-string courses (12 strings total).\nDesign changes in the history of the mandolin have often involved the soundboard (the top). Early instruments were quiet, strung with gut strings, and plucked with the fingers or with a quill. Modern instruments are louder, using metal strings, which exert more pressure than the gut strings. The modern soundboard is designed to withstand the pressure of metal strings that would break earlier instruments. The soundboard comes in many shapes\u2014but generally round or teardrop-shaped, sometimes with scrolls or other projections. It usually has one or more sound holes in it, which may be round, oval, or shaped like a calligraphic \"f\" (f-hole). A round or oval sound hole may be covered with a decorative rosette or bordered with purfling.\nHistory.\nMandolins evolved from lutes, a family of instruments in Europe. Predecessors include the gittern and mandore or mandola in Italy during the 17th and 18th centuries. There were a variety of regional variants, but the two most widespread ones were the Neapolitan mandolin and the Lombard mandolin. The Neapolitan style has spread worldwide.\nConstruction.\nMandolins have a body that acts as a resonator, attached to a neck. The resonating body may be shaped as a bowl () or a box (). Traditional Italian mandolins, such as the Neapolitan mandolin, meet the necked bowl description. The necked box instruments include archtop mandolins and the flatback mandolins.\nStrings run between mechanical tuning machines at the top of the neck to a tailpiece that anchors the other end of the strings. The strings are suspended over the neck and soundboard and pass over a floating bridge. The bridge is kept in contact with the soundboard by the downward pressure from the strings. The neck is either flat or has a slight radius, and is covered with a fingerboard with frets. The action of the strings on the bridge causes the soundboard to vibrate, producing sound.\nLike any plucked instrument, mandolin notes decay to silence rather than sound out continuously as with a bowed note on a violin, and mandolin notes decay faster than larger chordophones like the guitar. This encourages the use of tremolo (rapid picking of one or more pairs of strings) to create sustained notes or chords. The mandolin's paired strings facilitate this technique: the plectrum (pick) strikes each of a pair of strings alternately, providing a more full and continuous sound than a single string would.\nVarious design variations and amplification techniques have been used to make mandolins comparable in volume with louder instruments and orchestras, including the creation of mandolin-banjo hybrids with the drum-like body of the louder banjo, adding metal resonators (most notably by Dobro and the National String Instrument Corporation) to make a resonator mandolin, and amplifying electric mandolins through amplifiers.\nTuning.\nA variety of different tunings are used. Usually, courses of 2 adjacent strings are tuned in unison. By far the most common tuning is the same as violin tuning, in scientific pitch notation G3\u2013D4\u2013A4\u2013E5, or in Helmholtz pitch notation: g\u2013d\u2032\u2013a\u2032\u2013e\u2033.\nThe numbers of Hz shown above assume a 440\u00a0Hz A, standard in most parts of the western world. Some players use an A up to 10\u00a0Hz above or below a 440, mainly outside the United States.\nOther tunings exist, including \"cross-tunings\", in which the usually doubled string runs are tuned to different pitches. Additionally, guitarists may sometimes tune a mandolin to mimic a portion of the intervals on a standard guitar tuning to achieve familiar fretting patterns.\nMandolin family.\nSoprano.\nThe mandolin is the soprano member of the mandolin family, as the violin is the soprano member of the violin family. Like the violin, its scale length is typically about . Modern American mandolins modelled after Gibsons have a longer scale, about . The strings in each of its double-strung courses are tuned in unison, and the courses use the same tuning as the violin: G3\u2013D4\u2013A4\u2013E5.\nPiccolo.\nThe \"piccolo\" or \"sopranino mandolin\" is a rare member of the family, tuned one octave above the mandola and one fourth above the mandolin (C4\u2013G4\u2013D5\u2013A5); the same relation as that of the piccolo (to the western concert flute) or violino piccolo (to the violin and viola). One model was manufactured by the Lyon &amp; Healy company under the Leland brand. A handful of modern intruments makers build piccolo mandolins.\nAlto.\nThe mandola, termed the \"tenor mandola\" in Britain and Ireland and \"liola\" or \"alto mandolin\" in continental Europe, is tuned a fifth below the mandolin, in the same relationship as that of the viola to the violin. Some also call this instrument the \"alto mandola\". Its scale length is typically about . It is normally tuned like a viola (perfect fifth below the mandolin) and tenor banjo: C3\u2013G3\u2013D4\u2013A4.\nTenor.\nThe \"octave mandolin\" (US and Canada), termed the \"octave mandola\" in Britain and Ireland and \"mandola\" in continental Europe, is tuned an octave below the mandolin: G2\u2013D3\u2013A3\u2013E4. Its relationship to the mandolin is that of the tenor violin to the violin, or the tenor saxophone to the soprano saxophone. Octave mandolin scale length is typically about , although instruments with scales as short as or as long as are not unknown.\nThe instrument has a variant off the coast of South America in Trinidad, where it is known as the bandol, a flat-backed instrument with four courses, the lower two strung with metal and nylon strings.\nThe Irish bouzouki, though not strictly a member of the mandolin family, has a reasonable resemblance and similar range to the octave mandolin. It derives from the Greek bouzouki (a long-necked lute), constructed like a flat-backed mandolin and uses fifth-based tunings, most often G2\u2013D3\u2013A3\u2013D4. Other tunings include: A2\u2013D3\u2013A3\u2013D4, G2\u2013D3\u2013A3\u2013E4 (an octave below the mandolin\u2014in which case it essentially functions as an octave mandolin), G2\u2013D3\u2013G3\u2013D4 or A2\u2013D3\u2013A3\u2013E4. Although the Irish bouzouki's bass course pairs are most often tuned in unison, on some instruments one of each pair is replaced with a lighter string and tuned in octaves, similar to the 12-string guitar. While occupying the same range as the octave mandolin/octave mandola, the Irish bouzouki is theoretically distinguished from the former instrument by its longer scale length, typically from , although scales as long as , which is the usual Greek bouzouki scale, are not unknown. In modern usage, however, the terms \"octave mandolin\" and \"Irish bouzouki\" are often used interchangeably to refer to the same instrument.\nThe modern cittern may also be loosely included in an \"extended\" mandolin family, based on resemblance to the flat-backed mandolins, which it predates. Its own lineage dates it back to the Renaissance. It is typically a five course (ten-string) instrument having a scale length between . The instrument is most often tuned to either D2\u2013G2\u2013D3\u2013A3\u2013D4 or G2\u2013D3\u2013A3\u2013D4\u2013A4, and is essentially an octave mandola with a fifth course at either the top or the bottom of its range. Some luthiers, such as Stefan Sobell, also refer to the octave mandola or a shorter-scaled Irish bouzouki as a cittern, irrespective of whether it has four or five courses.\nOther relatives of the cittern, which might also be loosely linked to the mandolins (and are sometimes tuned and played as such), include the 6-course/12-string Portuguese guitar and the 5-course/9-string waldzither.\nBaritone/Bass.\nThe mandocello is classically tuned to an octave plus a fifth below the mandolin, in the same relationship as that of the cello to the violin, its strings being tuned to C2\u2013G2\u2013D3\u2013A3. Its scale length is typically about . A typical violoncello scale is .\nThe mandolone was a Baroque member of the mandolin family in the bass range that was surpassed by the mandocello. It was part of the Neapolitan mandolin family.\nThe Greek \"laouto\" or \"laghouto\" (long-necked lute) is similar to a mandocello, ordinarily tuned C3/C2\u2013G3/G2\u2013D3/D3\u2013A3/A3 with half of each pair of the lower two courses being tuned an octave high on a lighter gauge string. The body is a staved bowl, the saddle-less bridge glued to the flat face like most ouds and lutes, with mechanical tuners, steel strings, and tied gut frets. Modern laoutos, as played on Crete, have the entire lower course tuned to C3, a reentrant octave above the expected low C. Its scale length is typically about .\nThe Algerian \"mandole\" was developed by an Italian luthier in the early 1930s, scaled up from a mandola until it reached a scale length of approximately 25 to 27 inches. It is a flatback instrument, with a wide neck and 4 courses (8 strings), 5 courses (10 strings) or 6 courses (12 strings), and is used in Algeria and Morocco. The instrument can be tuned as a guitar, oud, or mandocello, depending on the music it will be used to play and player preference. When tuning it as a guitar the strings will be tuned (E2) (E2) A2 A2 D3 D3 G3 G3 B3 B3 (E4) (E4); strings in parentheses are dropped for a five- or four-course instrument. Using a common Arabic oud tuning D2 D2 G2 G2 A2 A2 D3 D3 (G3) (G3) (C4) (C4). For a mandocello tuning using fifths C2 C2 G2 G2 D3 D3 A3 A3 (E4) (E4).\nMandobass.\nThe mandobass is the bass version of the mandolin, just as the double bass is the bass to the violin. Like the double bass, it most frequently has four single strings, rather than double courses\u2014and like the double bass, it is most commonly tuned to perfect fourths rather than fifths like most mandolin family instruments: E1\u2013A1\u2013D2\u2013G2. These were made by the Gibson company in the early 20th century and were never very common. A smaller scale four-string mandobass, usually tuned in fifths: G1\u2013D2\u2013A2\u2013E3 (two octaves below the mandolin), though not as resonant as the larger instrument, was often preferred by players as easier to handle and more portable. Reportedly, however, most mandolin orchestras preferred to use the ordinary double bass, rather than a specialised mandolin family instrument. Calace and other Italian makers predating Gibson also made mandolin-basses.\nThe relatively rare eight-string mandobass, or \"tremolo-bass\", also exists, with double courses like the rest of the mandolin family, and is tuned either G1\u2013D2\u2013A2\u2013E3, two octaves lower than the mandolin, or C1\u2013G1\u2013D2\u2013A2, two octaves below the mandola.\nVariations.\nBowlback.\nBowlback mandolins (also known as roundbacks), are used worldwide. They are most commonly manufactured in Europe, where the long history of mandolin development has created local styles. However, Japanese luthiers also make them.\nOwing to the shape and to the common construction from wood strips of alternating colors, in the United States these are sometimes colloquially referred to as the \"potato bug\", \"potato beetle\", or tater-bug mandolin.\nNeapolitan and Roman styles.\nThe Neapolitan style has an almond-shaped body resembling a bowl, constructed from curved strips of wood. It usually has a bent sound table, canted in two planes with the design to take the tension of the eight metal strings arranged in four courses. A hardwood fingerboard sits on top of or is flush with the sound table. Very old instruments may use wooden tuning pegs, while newer instruments tend to use geared metal tuners. The bridge is a movable length of hardwood. A pickguard is glued below the sound hole under the strings. European roundbacks commonly use a scale instead of the common on archtop Mandolins.\nIntertwined with the Neapolitan style is the Roman style mandolin, which has influenced it. The Roman mandolin had a fingerboard that was more curved and narrow. The fingerboard was lengthened over the sound hole for the E strings, the high pitched strings. The shape of the back of the neck was different, less rounded with an edge, the bridge was curved making the G strings higher. The Roman mandolin had mechanical tuning gears before the Neapolitan.\nManufacturers of Neapolitan-style mandolins.\nProminent Italian manufacturers include Vinaccia (Naples), Embergher (Rome) and Calace (Naples). Other modern manufacturers include Lorenzo Lippi (Milan), Hendrik van den Broek (Netherlands), Brian Dean (Canada), Salvatore Masiello and Michele Caiazza (La Bottega del Mandolino) and Ferrara, Gabriele Pandini.\nIn the United States, when the bowlback was being made in numbers, Lyon and Healy was a major manufacturer, especially under the \"Washburn\" brand. Other American manufacturers include Martin, Vega, and Larson Brothers.\nIn Canada, Brian Dean has manufactured instruments in Neapolitan, Roman, German and American styles but is also known for his original 'Grand Concert' design created for American virtuoso Joseph Brent.\nGerman manufacturers include Albert &amp; Mueller, Dietrich, Klaus Knorr, Reinhold Seiffert and Alfred Woll. The German bowlbacks use a style developed by Seiffert, with a larger and rounder body.\nJapanese brands include Kunishima and Suzuki. Other Japanese manufacturers include Oona, Kawada, Noguchi, Toichiro Ishikawa, Rokutaro Nakade, Otiai Tadao, Yoshihiko Takusari, Nokuti Makoto, Watanabe, Kanou Kadama and Ochiai.\nOther bowlback styles.\nAnother family of bowlback mandolins came from Milan and Lombardy. These mandolins are closer to the mandolino or mandore than other modern mandolins. They are shorter and wider than the standard Neapolitan mandolin, with a shallow back. The instruments have 6 strings, 3 wire treble-strings and 3 gut or wire-wrapped-silk bass-strings. The strings ran between the tuning pegs and a bridge that was glued to the soundboard, as a guitar's. The Lombard mandolins were tuned g\u2013b\u2013e\u2032\u2013a\u2032\u2013d\u2033\u2013g\u2033 (shown in Helmholtz pitch notation). A developer of the Milanese style was Antonio Monzino (Milan) and his family who made them for six generations.\nSamuel Adelstein described the Lombard mandolin in 1893 as wider and shorter than the Neapolitan mandolin, with a shallower back and a shorter and wider neck, with six single strings to the regular mandolin's set of 4. The Lombard was tuned C\u2013D\u2013A\u2013E\u2013B\u2013G. The strings were fastened to the bridge like a guitar's. There were 20 frets, covering three octaves, with an additional 5 notes. When Adelstein wrote, there were no nylon strings, and the gut and single strings \"do not vibrate so clearly and sweetly as the double steel string of the Neapolitan.\"\nBrescian mandolin or Cremonese mandolin.\nBrescian mandolins (also known as Cremonese) that have survived in museums have four gut strings instead of six and a fixed bridge. The mandolin was tuned in fifths, like the Neapolitan mandolin. In his 1805 mandolin method, \"Anweisung die Mandoline von selbst zu erlernen nebst einigen Uebungsstucken von Bortolazzi\", Bartolomeo Bortolazzi popularised the Cremonese mandolin, which had four single-strings and a fixed bridge, to which the strings were attached. Bortolazzi said in this book that the new wire-strung mandolins were uncomfortable to play, when compared with the gut-string instruments. Also, he felt they had a \"less pleasing...hard, zither-like tone\" as compared to the gut string's \"softer, full-singing tone.\"\nHe favored the four single strings of the Cremonese instrument, which were tuned the same as the Neapolitan.\nGenoese mandolin, a blend of styles.\nLike the Lombard mandolin, the Genoese mandolin was not tuned in fifths. Its 6 gut strings (or 6 courses of strings) were tuned as a guitar but one octave higher: e-a-d\u2019-g\u2019-b natural-e\u201d. Like the Neapolitan and unlike the Lombard mandolin, the Genoese does not have the bridge glued to the soundboard, but holds the bridge on with downward tension, from strings that run between the bottom and neck of the instrument. The neck was wider than the Neapolitan mandolin's neck. The peg-head is similar to the guitar's.\nArchtop.\nAt the very end of the 19th century, a new style, with a carved top and back construction inspired by violin family instruments began to supplant the European-style bowl-back instruments in the United States. This new style is credited to mandolins designed and built by Orville Gibson, a Kalamazoo, Michigan, instrument maker who founded the \"Gibson Mandolin-Guitar Manufacturing Co., Limited\" in 1902. Gibson mandolins evolved into two basic styles: the Florentine or F-style, which has a decorative scroll near the neck, two points on the lower body and usually a scroll carved into the headstock; and the A-style, which is pear-shaped, has no points and usually has a simpler headstock.\nThese styles generally have either two f-shaped soundholes like a violin (F-5 and A-5), or a single oval sound hole (F-4 and A-4 and lower models) directly under the strings. Much variation exists between makers working from these archetypes, and other variants have become increasingly common. Generally, in the United States, Gibson F-hole F-5 mandolins and mandolins influenced by that design are strongly associated with bluegrass, while the A-style is associated with other types of music, although it too is most often used for and associated with bluegrass. The F-5's more complicated woodwork also translates into a more expensive instrument.\nInternal bracing to support the top in the F-style mandolins is usually achieved with parallel tone bars, similar to the bass bar on a violin. Some makers instead employ \"X-bracing\", which is two tone-bars mortised together to form an X. Some luthiers now using a \"modified x-bracing\" that incorporates both a tone bar and X-bracing.\nNumerous modern mandolin makers build instruments that largely replicate the Gibson F-5 Artist models built in the early 1920s under the supervision of Gibson acoustician Lloyd Loar. Original Loar-signed instruments are sought after and extremely valuable. Other makers from the Loar period and earlier include Lyon and Healy, Vega and Larson Brothers.\nPressed archtops.\nThe ideal for archtops has been solid pieces of wood carved into the right shape. However, another archtop exists, the top made of laminated wood or thin sheets of solid wood, pressed into the arched shape. These have become increasingly common in the world of internationally constructed musical instruments in the 21st century.\nPressed-top instruments are made to appear the same as carved-top instruments but do not sound the same as carved-wood tops. Carved-wood tops when carved to the ideal thickness, produce the sound consumers expect. Not carving them correctly dulls the sound. The sound of a carved-wood instrument changes the longer it is played, and older instruments are sought out for their rich sound.\nLaminated-wood presstops are less resonant than carved wood, the wood and glue vibrating differently than wood grain. Presstops made of solid wood have the wood's natural grain compressed, typically creating a sound that is less full than a well-made, carved-top mandolin.\nFlatback.\nFlatback mandolins use a thin sheet of wood with bracing for the back, as a guitar uses, rather than the bowl of the bowlback or the arched back of the carved mandolins.\nLike the bowlback, the flatback has a round sound hole. This has been sometimes modified to an elongated hole, called a D-hole. The body has a rounded almond shape with flat or sometimes canted soundboard.\nThe type was developed in Europe in the 1850s. The French and Germans called it a Portuguese mandolin, although they also developed it locally. The Germans used it in Wandervogel.\nThe bandolim is commonly used wherever the Spanish and Portuguese took it: in South America, in Brazil (Choro) and in the Philippines.\nIn the early 1970s English luthier Stefan Sobell developed a large-bodied, flat-backed mandolin with a carved soundboard, based on his own cittern design; this is often called a 'Celtic' mandolin.\nAmerican forms include the Army-Navy mandolin, the flatiron and the pancake mandolins.\nTone.\nThe tone of the flatback is described as warm or mellow, suitable for folk music and smaller audiences. The instrument sound does not punch through the other players' sound like a carved top does.\nDouble top, double back.\nThe double top is a feature that luthiers are experimenting with in the 21st century, to get better sound. However, mandolinists and luthiers have been experimenting with them since at least the early 1900s.\nBack in the early 1900s, mandolinist Ginislao Paris approached Luigi Embergher to build custom mandolins. The sticker inside one of the four surviving instruments indicates the build was called after him, the \"Sistema Ginislao Paris\"). Paris' round-back double-top mandolins use a false back below the soundboard to create a second hollow space within the instrument.\nModern mandolinists such as Joseph Brent and Avi Avital use instruments customized, either by the luthier's choice or at the request of the player. Joseph Brent's mandolin, made by Brian Dean also uses what Brent calls a false back. Brent's mandolin was the luthier's solution to Brent's request for a loud mandolin in which the wood was clearly audible, with less metallic sound from the strings. The type used by Avital is variation of the flatback, with a double top that encloses a resonating chamber, sound holes on the side, and a convex back. It is made by one manufacturer in Israel, luthier Arik Kerman. Other players of Kerman mandolins include Alon Sariel, Jacob Reuven, and Tom Cohen.\nOthers.\nMandolinetto.\nOther American-made variants include the mandolinetto or Howe-Orme guitar-shaped mandolin (manufactured by the Elias Howe Company between 1897 and roughly 1920), which featured a cylindrical bulge along the top from fingerboard end to tailpiece and the Vega mando-lute (more commonly called a cylinder-back mandolin manufactured by the Vega Company between 1913 and roughly 1927), which had a similar longitudinal bulge but on the back rather than the front of the instrument.\nMandolin-banjo.\nAn instrument with a mandolin neck paired with a banjo-style body was patented by Benjamin Bradbury of Brooklyn in 1882 and given the name \"banjolin\" by John Farris in 1885. Today \"banjolin\" is sometimes reserved to describe an instrument with four strings, while the version with the four courses of double strings is called a \"mandolin-banjo\".\nResonator mandolin.\nA resonator mandolin or \"resophonic mandolin\" is a mandolin whose sound is produced by one or more metal cones (resonators) instead of the customary wooden soundboard (mandolin top/face). Historic brands include Dobro and National.\nElectric mandolin.\nAs with almost every other contemporary chordophone, another modern variant is the electric mandolin. These mandolins can have four or five individual or double courses of strings. They were developed in the early 1930s, contemporaneous with the development of the electric guitar. They come in solid body and acoustic electric forms.\nSpecific instruments have been designed to overcome the mandolin's rapid decay with its plucked notes. Fender released a model in 1992 with an additional string (a high A, above the E string), a tremolo bridge and extra humbucker pickup (total of two). The result was an instrument capable of playing heavy metal style guitar riffs or violin-like passages with sustained notes that can be adjusted as with an electric guitar.\nPlaying traditions worldwide.\nThe international repertoire of music for mandolin is almost unlimited, and musicians use it to play various types of music. This is especially true of violin music, since the mandolin has the same tuning as the violin. Following its invention and early development in Italy the mandolin spread throughout the European continent. The instrument was primarily used in a classical tradition with Mandolin orchestras, so-called \"Estudiantinas\" or in Germany \"Zupforchestern\" appearing in many cities. Following this continental popularity of the mandolin family local traditions appeared outside Europe in the Americas and in Japan. Travelling mandolin virtuosi like Carlo Curti, Giuseppe Pettine, Raffaele Calace and Silvio Ranieri contributed to the mandolin becoming a \"fad\" instrument in the early 20th century. This \"mandolin craze\" was fading by the 1930s, but just as this practice was falling into disuse, the mandolin found a new niche in American country, old-time music, bluegrass and folk music. More recently, the Baroque and Classical mandolin repertory and styles have benefited from the raised awareness of and interest in Early music, with media attention to classical players such as Israeli Avi Avital, Italian Carlo Aonzo, and American Joseph Brent. In India, the mandolin is played in classical Carnatic music. The musician U. Srinivas was perhaps the greatest mandolin player in this style. Lauded across the world for his virtuosity with the instrument, he died young.\nNotable literature.\nWestern European classical music.\nThe mandolin appears sporadically in the Western Euoropean classical music tradition. It was often perceived historically as a folk instrument. Significant composers did write music specifically for the mandolin, but few large works were composed for it by the most widely regarded composers. The total number of these works is rather small in comparison to\u2014say\u2014those composed for violin. One result of this dearth being that there were few positions for mandolinists in regular orchestras. To fill this gap in the literature, mandolin orchestras have traditionally played many arrangements of music written for regular orchestras or other ensembles. Some players have sought out contemporary composers to solicit new works.\nFurthermore, of the works that have been written for mandolin from the 18th century onward, many have been lost or forgotten. Some of these await discovery in museums and libraries and archives. One example of rediscovered 18th-century music for mandolin and ensembles with mandolins is the \"Gimo collection\", collected in the first half of 1762 by Jean Lefebure. Lefebure collected the music in Italy, and it was forgotten until manuscripts were rediscovered.\nVivaldi created some concertos for mandolinos and orchestra: one for 4-chord mandolino, string bass &amp; continuo in C major, (RV 425), and one for two 5-chord mandolinos, bass strings &amp; continuo in G major, (RV 532), and concerto for two mandolins, 2 violons \"in Tromba\"\u20142 fl\u00fbtes \u00e0 bec, 2 salmoe, 2 th\u00e9orbes, violoncelle, cordes et basse continuein in C major (p.\u00a016).\nBeethoven composed mandolin music and enjoyed playing the mandolin. His 4 small pieces date from 1796: Sonatine WoO 43a; Adagio ma non troppo WoO 43b; Sonatine WoO 44a and Andante con Variazioni WoO 44b.\nThe opera \"Don Giovanni\" by Mozart (1787) includes mandolin parts, including the accompaniment to the famous aria \"Deh vieni alla finestra\", and Verdi's opera Otello calls for guzla accompaniment in the aria \"Dove guardi splendono raggi\", but the part is commonly performed on mandolin.\nGustav Mahler used the mandolin in his Symphony No. 7, Symphony No. 8 and Das Lied von der Erde.\nParts for mandolin are included in works by Schoenberg (Variations Op. 31), Stravinsky (Agon), Prokofiev (Romeo and Juliet) and Webern (opus Parts 10)\nSome 20th-century composers also used the mandolin as their instrument of choice (amongst these are: Schoenberg, Webern, Stravinsky and Prokofiev).\nAmong the most important European mandolin composers of the 20th century are Raffaele Calace (composer, performer and luthier) and Giuseppe Anedda (virtuoso concert pianist and professor of the first chair of the Conservatory of Italian Mandolin, Padua, 1975). Today representatives of Italian classical music and Italian classical-contemporary music include Ugo Orlandi, Carlo Aonzo, Dorina Frati, Mauro Squillante and Duilio Galfetti.\nJapanese composers also produced orchestral music for mandolin in the 20th century, but these are not well known outside Japan. Notable composers include Morishige Takei and Yasuo Kuwahara.\nTraditional mandolin orchestras remain especially popular in Japan and Germany, but also exist throughout the United States, Europe and the rest of the world. They perform works composed for mandolin family instruments, or re-orchestrations of traditional pieces. The structure of a contemporary traditional mandolin orchestra consists of: first and second mandolins, mandolas (either octave mandolas, tuned an octave below the mandolin, or tenor mandolas, tuned like the viola), mandocellos (tuned like the cello), and bass instruments (conventional string bass or, rarely, mandobasses). Smaller ensembles, such as quartets composed of two mandolins, mandola, and mandocello, may also be found.\nUnaccompanied solo.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMinuet\n Moving Fast Through Autumn Light (2000)\n The Three Names Of Shiva (1992)\nVariations on a Theme by Haydn\nSong of summer\n Cadenza No.1\n Cadenza No.2\n Cadenza No.3\n Cadenza No.4\n Cadenza No.5\n Cadenza No.6\n Cadenza No.7\n Cadenza No.8\n Cadenza No.10\n Cadenza No.11\nPrelude No. 1\nPrelude No. 2\nPrelude No. 3\nPrelude No. 5\nPrelude No. 10\nPrelude No. 11\nPrelude No. 14\nPrelude No. 15\nLarge prelude\nCollard\nSylvia\nMinuet of rose\nPartita No. 1, etc.\nSonatine, etc.\nSense \u2013 structure\nThe Gray Wolf\nPerpetuum Mobile\nVariations from Der Fluyten Lust-hof\nHataoriru maiden\nSpring to go\nVariations on Schubert lullaby\nCity of Elm\nVariations on Kojonotsuki of subject matter\nTwo Episodes for solo mandolin\n\"Spring has come\" Variations\nPrayer\nFantasia second No.\nSerenata\nBeautiful my child and where\nPrayer of the evening\nVariations on September Affair of the subject matter\nSpring snow of ballads\nIn early spring\nNocturne\nEtude\nFantasia first No.\nMoon and mountain witch\nImpromptu\nWinter Light\nMukyu motion\nJon-gara\nSilent door\nAccompaniment with solo.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSonatine in C minor, WoO 43a\nAdagio in E\u266d major WoO 43b\nSonatine in C major WoO 44a\nAndante and Variations in D major WoO 44b\nDioces aztecas\nThe Legend of Princess Noccalula\n 4 Quartet for Mandolin, Violin, Viola, and Lute\n 4 Divertimenti for Mandolin, Violin &amp; B.c.\nSonata in C major Op. 35\nCs\u00e1rd\u00e1s\nSpanish Capriccio\nMazurka for concert\nWaltz for concert\nBizaria\nAria Varia data\nMandolin Concerto No. 1\nMandolin Concerto No. 1\nMandolin Concerto No. 2\nMukyu motion\nTarantella\nSong of Nostalgia\nElegy\nMazurka for concert\nWarsaw of memories\nGypsy style Capriccio\nFantastic Waltz\nMukyu motion\nPolonaise for concert\nDivertimento for mandolin and harp\nSuch as a duo for the mandolin and guitar\nSerenade for mandolin and guitar\nGrand Sonata for mandolin and guitar\nSlovenia wind Dances such as\nSonatine\nLight of silence\nSonata for mandolin and piano (2002)\nDuo and musical ensemble.\nA duet or duo is a musical composition for two performers in which the performers have equal importance to the piece. A musical ensemble with more than two solo instruments or voices is called trio, quartet, quintet, sextet, septet, octet, etc.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVenezuelan Serenade\nIn Venice Waters\nChants Des Gondoliers\nDuo\nSonata in D major for Mandolin and Basso Continuo\nL'Albero di Natale, pastorale for mandolin &amp; guitar\nIl Gondoliere, valse for 2 mandolins &amp; guitar\nIl Carnevale Di Venezia Con Variazioni\nSonate pour mandoline en la, Op. 2 n\u00b0 1\nSonate pour mandoline en r\u00e9 mineur, Op. 2 n\u00b0 2\nSonate pour mandoline en r\u00e9, Op. 2 n\u00b0 9\n\"In Gondola\" Serenata Veneziana \"Ai Mandolnisti Di Venezia\nBarcarola Op. 100 Per Chitarra\nBarcarola Op. 116 Per Liuto \"A Mio Figlio Peppino\"\n* \"Sinfonia for 2 Mandolins &amp; Continuo\", (Gimo 76)\nAu Fil De L'Eau\nCharon Crossing the Styx (mandolin &amp; double bass)\nFour Whimsies (mandolin &amp; octave mandolin)\nLes gravures de Gustave Dor\u00e9 (mandolin &amp; guitar)\nSix Pantomimes for Two Mandolins\nSonatina No. 3 for Mandolin &amp; Violin\nOp. 59a Sonatina for 2 mandolins (1952)\n Hooperisms Op.181 (1991)\n Barbara and Deborah Op.175 (1990)\n Three Mandolin Duets Op.282 (2005)\n Paul and Adrian Op.165(1989)\n\"Sonata for Mandolin &amp; Continuo\" (Gimo 141)\n\"Sonata per camera\" (Gimo 143)\nSinfonia for 2 Mandolins &amp; Continuo, (Gimo 149)\n\"Trio for 2 Mandolins &amp; Continuo,\" (Gimo 150)\nSonata in D major for Mandolin and Basso Continuo\nSonata in G major for Mandolin and Basso Continuo\nSonata in D major for Mandolin and Basso Continuo\nInteriors of a Courtyard (mandolin &amp; guitar)\nSonata in G major for Mandolin and Basso Continuo\nConcerto for two mandolin and piano\nMandolin Canons (mandolin &amp; guitar)\n 3 Duets for Mandolin and Violin\n Serenade for Viola and Mandolin\nDen lille Havfrue (mandolin &amp; guitar)\nMit den Augen eines Falken for mandolin &amp; guitar (2016)\nBarcarola Veneziana Di Mendelssohn\nLe Chant Du Gondolier\nGondolata Op. 74 Per Mandolino, Clarinetto E Pianoforte\n\"In Gondola\" Ricordi di Mendelssohn\nNotturno Veneziano Per Quartetto Romantico\nMedaka, revolving lantern\n Wired Life (1999)\nBarcarola Per Mandolino\nDu edge Martino\nSonata in D minor (K77)\nSonata in E minor (K81)\nSonata in G minor (K88)\nSonata No. 54 (K. 89) in D minor for Mandolin and Basso Continuo\nSonata in D minor (K89)\nSonata in D minor (K90)\nSonata in G (K91)\nSilent Light for mandolin &amp; harpsichord (2001)\nTwo Pieces for Two Mandolins (2002)\nVenezia Di Notte, Barcarola Op. 9 No. 1\nSerenata Per Voce, Mandolino E Pianoforte Op. 9 No. 2 Alla Contessa Tat'jana L'vovna Tolstaja\nSonate pour mandoline en la, Op. 12 n\u00b0 1\nSonate pour mandoline en r\u00e9 mineur, Op. 12 n\u00b0 2\nSonate pour mandoline en sol, Op. 12 n\u00b0 3\nSonate pour mandoline en sol mineur, Op. 12 n\u00b0 4\nSonate pour mandoline en mi mineur, Op. 12 n\u00b0 5\nSonate pour mandoline en r\u00e9, Op. 12 n\u00b0 6\nConcerto.\nConcerto: a musical composition generally composed of three movements, in which, usually, one solo instrument (for instance, a piano, violin, cello or flute) is accompanied by an orchestra or concert band.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \"Three Sisters\", for mandolin and chamber orchestra\n Concerto for Mandolin and Chamber Orchestra Op.141 (1984)\n Concerto No. 2 Op.151 (1986)\n Zohar, Sephardic Concerto (1998)\n The Spirit's Lay Concerto for Mandolin and Orchestra (2000)\n Concerto For Mandolin and Chamber Orchestra (1998)\n Concerto for Mandolin and Orchestra in D Major\nMandolin Concerto in C major,\nConcerto for two mandolinos in G major\nConcerto for two mandolinos, 2 violons \" in Tromba\"\u20142 fl\u00fbtes \u00e0 bec, 2 salmoe, 2 th\u00e9orbes, violoncelle, cordes et basse continuein in C major\nMandolin Concerto (1984)\nMandolin Concerto in G Major\nMandolin Concerto No. 1 in D Minor\nMandolin Concerto No. 2 in D Major\nMandolin Concerto No. 3 in E Minor\nMandolin Concerto No. 4 in G Major\nConcerto for Two Mandolins (\"Rromane Bjavela\")\n\"Los ocho puentes\" for four recorders, mandolin and percussion (1984)\nMandolin Concerto in G major\nConcerto for piano, mandolin, trumpet and double bass in E\u266d major\nMandolin Concerto in B\u266d major\nMandolin Concerto in E\u266d major\nMandolin Concerto in C major\nMandolin Concerto in G major\nMandolin Concerto in G major\nMandolin Concerto\nMandolin Concerto\nMandolin and the Concerto for Strings\nConcerto for Mandolin (1985)\nSonatinetta (1984)\nSurrealistic Serenade (1985)\nMandolin Concerto\nMandolin and the Concerto for Strings\n\"Arc\" for mandolin and orchestra\nSuite \"positive and negative\"\nMandolin Concerto\n\"Nedudim\" (\"Wanderings\") Fantasia-Concertante for mandolin and string orchestra (2014)\nMandolin in the orchestra.\nOrchestral works in which the mandolin has a limited part.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOpera \"La finta parigina\"\nOpera \"The Curious Affair of the Count of Monte Blotto\"\nConcerto for orchestra \"25 Concertos Comiques\": \"Concerto nr 24 in C major \"La Marche du Huron\"\"\nOpera \"The Adventures of Pinocchio\" (2007)\nSymphony No. 2 \"Symphony Of Chorales\" (1958)\n \"L'Amant jaloux\" (Paris, 1778)\nOratorio \"Alexander Balus\"\nOpera \"Le Grand Macabre\"\nOpera \"Don Perlimplin, ovvero il trionfo dell'amore e dell'immaginazione\"\nViolin concerto (1969)\nSuite aus der Oper \"Hyperion\" (1969\u20131970)\n\"Amanda\"/Serenata VI\n\"Composizione in tre tempi\"\n\"Symphony No. 7, Song of the Night\"\n\"Symphony No. 8, Symphony of Thousands\"\nSymphony \"Song of the Earth\"\nOpera \"Don Giovanni\"\nThe Barber of Seville\nOpera \"Halewijn\"\n\"Romance sans paroles\"\nSymphony No. 2\nSymphony No. 3\nBallet music \"Romeo and Juliet\"\nSymphonic poem \"Festivals of Rome\"\nTarare (Paris, 1787)\nBallet music \"Anna Karenina\"\nOpera \"Moses und Aron\"\n\"Variations for Orchestra\"\n Opera \"A Basso Porto\": \"Intermezzo for mandolins and orchestra\"\nBallet music \"Agon\"\nOpera \"Otello\"\nOratorio \"Juditha triumphans\"\n\"Five Pieces for Orchestra\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nChord dictionaries\nMethod and instructional guides"}
{"id": "18889", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18889", "title": "Microphotonics", "text": "Microphotonics is a branch of technology that deals with directing light on a microscopic scale and is used in optical networking. Particularly, it refers to the branch of technology that deals with wafer-level integrated devices and systems that emit, transmit, detect, and process light along with other forms of radiant energy with photon as the quantum unit.\nMicrophotonics employs at least two different materials with a large differential index of refraction to squeeze the light down to a small size. Generally speaking, virtually all of microphotonics relies on Fresnel reflection to guide the light. If the photons reside mainly in the higher index material, the confinement is due to total internal reflection. If the confinement is due many distributed Fresnel reflections, the device is termed a photonic crystal. There are many different types of geometries used in microphotonics including optical waveguides, optical microcavities, and Arrayed waveguide gratings.\nPhotonic crystals.\nPhotonic crystals are non-conducting materials that reflect various wavelengths of light almost perfectly. Such a crystal can be referred to as a perfect mirror. Other devices employed in microphotonics include micromirrors and photonic wire waveguides. These tools are used to \"mold the flow of light\", a famous phrase for describing the goal of microphotonics. The crystals serve as structures that allow the manipulation, confinement, and control of light in one, two, or three dimensions of space.\nMicrodisks, microtoroids, and microspheres.\nAn optical microdisk, optical microtoroid, or optical microsphere uses internal reflection in a circular geometry to hold on to the photons. This type of circularly symmetric optical resonance is called a Whispering gallery mode, after Lord Rayleigh coined the term.\nApplication.\nMicrophotonics has biological applications and these can be demonstrated in the case of the \"biophotonic chips\", which are developed to increase efficiency in terms of \"photonic yield\" or the collected luminescent signal emitted by fluorescent markers used in biological chips.\nCurrently, microphotonics technology is also being developed to replace electronics devices and bio-compatible intracellular devices. For instance, the long-standing goal of an all-optical router would eliminate electronic bottlenecks, speeding up the network. Perfect mirrors are being developed for use in fiber-optic cables."}
{"id": "18890", "revid": "18481282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18890", "title": "Microsoft Windows", "text": "Computer operating systems\nMicrosoft Windows, commonly known as Windows, is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Microsoft.\nIt is grouped into families that cater to particular sectors of the computing industry \u2013 Windows for personal computers, Windows Server for servers, and Windows IoT for embedded systems. Windows itself is further grouped into editions that cater to different users \u2013 Home for home users, Professional for advanced users, Education for schools, and Enterprise for corporations. Windows is sold both as a consumer retail product and to computer manufacturers, who bundle and distribute it with their systems. \nThe first version of Windows, Windows 1.0, was released on November 20, 1985 as a graphical operating system shell for MS-DOS in response to growing interest in graphical user interfaces (GUIs). The name \"Windows\" is a reference to the windowing system in GUIs. The 1990 release of Windows 3.0 catapulted its market success and led to the launch of various other product families, including the (now-defunct) Windows Mobile, Windows Phone, and Windows CE/Embedded Compact.\nWindows is the most popular desktop operating system in the world, with a 72% market share as of October\u00a02025[ [update]], and the second-most popular operating system overall, behind Android. As of August 2025, Windows 11 is the most used desktop version of Windows, with a market share of 53%.\nProduct line.\nAs of 2025,[ [update]] the only active top-level family is Windows NT. The first version, Windows NT 3.1, was intended for server computing and corporate workstations. It grew into a product line of its own and now consists of four sub-families that tend to be released almost simultaneously and share the same kernel.\nThese top-level Windows families are no longer actively developed:\nHistory.\nThe term \"Windows\" collectively describes any or all of several generations of Microsoft operating system products. These products are generally categorized as follows:\nEarly versions.\nThe history of Windows dates back to 1981 when Microsoft started work on a program called \"Interface Manager\". The name \"Windows\" comes from the fact that the system was one of the first to use graphical boxes to represent programs; in the industry, at the time, these were called \"windows\" and the underlying software was called \"windowing software.\" It was announced in November 1983 (after the Apple Lisa, but before the Macintosh) under the name \"Windows\", but Windows 1.0 was not released until November 1985. Windows 1.0 was to compete with Apple's operating system, but achieved little popularity. Windows 1.0 is not a complete operating system; rather, it extends MS-DOS. The shell of Windows 1.0 is a program known as the MS-DOS Executive. Components included Calculator, Calendar, Cardfile, Clipboard Viewer, Clock, Control Panel, Notepad, Paint, Reversi, Terminal and Write. Windows 1.0 does not allow overlapping windows. Instead, all windows are tiled. Only modal dialog boxes may appear over other windows. Microsoft sold as included Windows Development libraries with the C development environment, which included numerous windows samples.\nWindows 2.0 was released in December 1987, and was more popular than its predecessor. It features several improvements to the user interface and memory management. Windows 2.03 changed the OS from tiled windows to overlapping windows. The result of this change led to Apple Computer filing a suit against Microsoft alleging infringement on Apple's copyrights (eventually settled in court in Microsoft's favor in 1993). Windows 2.0 also introduced more sophisticated keyboard shortcuts and could make use of expanded memory.\nWindows 2.1 was released in two different versions: Windows/286 and Windows/386. Windows/386 uses the virtual 8086 mode of the Intel 80386 to multitask several DOS programs and the paged memory model to emulate expanded memory using available extended memory. Windows/286, in spite of its name, runs on both Intel 8086 and Intel 80286 processors. It runs in real mode but can make use of the high memory area.\nIn addition to full Windows packages, there were runtime-only versions that shipped with early Windows software from third parties and made it possible to run their Windows software on MS-DOS and without the full Windows feature set.\nThe early versions of Windows are often thought of as graphical shells, mostly because they ran on top of MS-DOS and used it for file system services. However, even the earliest Windows versions already assumed many typical operating system functions; notably, having their own executable file format and providing their own device drivers (timer, graphics, printer, mouse, keyboard and sound). Unlike MS-DOS, Windows allowed users to execute multiple graphical applications at the same time, through cooperative multitasking. Windows implemented an elaborate, segment-based, software virtual memory scheme, which allows it to run applications larger than available memory: code segments and resources are swapped in and thrown away when memory became scarce; data segments moved in memory when a given application had relinquished processor control.\nWindows 3.x.\nWindows 3.0, released in 1990, improved the design, mostly because of virtual memory and loadable virtual device drivers (VxDs) that allow Windows to share arbitrary devices between multi-tasked DOS applications. Windows 3.0 applications can run in protected mode, which gives them access to several megabytes of memory without the obligation to participate in the software virtual memory scheme. They run inside the same address space, where the segmented memory provides a degree of protection. Windows 3.0 also featured improvements to the user interface. Microsoft rewrote critical operations from C into assembly. Windows 3.0 was the first version of Windows to achieve broad commercial success, selling 2\u00a0million copies in the first six months.\nWindows 3.1, made generally available on March 1, 1992, featured a facelift. In October 1992, Windows for Workgroups, a special version with integrated peer-to-peer networking features, was released. It was sold along with Windows 3.1. Support for Windows 3.1 ended on December 31, 2001.\nWindows 3.2, released in 1994, is an updated version of the Chinese version of Windows 3.1. The update was limited to this language version, as it fixed only issues related to the complex writing system of the Chinese language. Windows 3.2 was generally sold by computer manufacturers with a ten-disk version of MS-DOS that also had Simplified Chinese characters in basic output and some translated utilities.\nWindows 9x.\nThe next major consumer-oriented release of Windows, Windows 95, was released on August 24, 1995. While still remaining MS-DOS-based, Windows 95 introduced support for native 32-bit applications, plug and play hardware, preemptive multitasking, long file names of up to 255 characters, and provided increased stability over its predecessors. Windows 95 also introduced a redesigned, object oriented user interface, replacing the previous Program Manager with the Start menu, taskbar, and Windows Explorer shell. Windows 95 was a major commercial success for Microsoft; Ina Fried of CNET remarked that \"by the time Windows 95 was finally ushered off the market in 2001, it had become a fixture on computer desktops around the world.\" Microsoft published four OEM Service Releases (OSR) of Windows 95, each of which was roughly equivalent to a service pack. The first OSR of Windows 95 was also the first version of Windows to be bundled with Microsoft's web browser, Internet Explorer. Mainstream support for Windows 95 ended on December 31, 2000, and extended support for Windows 95 ended on December 31, 2001.\nWindows 95 was followed up with the release of Windows 98 on June 25, 1998, which introduced the Windows Driver Model, support for USB composite devices, support for ACPI, hibernation, and support for multi-monitor configurations. Windows 98 also included integration with Internet Explorer 4 through Active Desktop and other aspects of the Windows Desktop Update (a series of enhancements to the Explorer shell which was also made available for Windows 95). In June 1999, Microsoft released Windows 98 Second Edition, an updated version of Windows 98. Windows 98 SE added Internet Explorer 5.0 and Windows Media Player 6.2 amongst other upgrades. Mainstream support for Windows 98 ended on June 30, 2002, and extended support for Windows 98 ended on July 11, 2006.\nOn September 14, 2000, Microsoft released Windows Me (Millennium Edition), the last DOS-based version of Windows. Windows Me incorporated visual interface enhancements from its Windows NT-based counterpart Windows 2000, had faster boot times than previous versions (which however, required the removal of the ability to access a real mode DOS environment, removing compatibility with some older programs), expanded multimedia functionality (including Windows Media Player 7, Windows Movie Maker, and the Windows Image Acquisition framework for retrieving images from scanners and digital cameras), additional system utilities such as System File Protection and System Restore, and updated home networking tools. However, Windows Me was faced with criticism for its speed and instability, along with hardware compatibility issues and its removal of real mode DOS support. \"PC World\" considered Windows Me to be one of the worst operating systems Microsoft had ever released, and the fourth worst tech product of all time.\nWindows NT.\nVersion history.\nEarly versions (Windows NT 3.1/3.5/3.51/4.0/2000).\nIn November 1988, a new development team within Microsoft (which included former Digital Equipment Corporation developers Dave Cutler and Mark Lucovsky) began work on a revamped version of IBM and Microsoft's OS/2 operating system known as \"NT OS/2\". NT OS/2 was intended to be a secure, multi-user operating system with POSIX compatibility and a modular, portable kernel with preemptive multitasking and support for multiple processor architectures. However, following the successful release of Windows 3.0, the NT development team decided to rework the project to use an extended 32-bit port of the Windows API known as Win32 instead of those of OS/2. Win32 maintained a similar structure to the Windows APIs (allowing existing Windows applications to easily be ported to the platform), but also supported the capabilities of the existing NT kernel. Following its approval by Microsoft's staff, development continued on what was now Windows NT, the first 32-bit version of Windows. However, IBM objected to the changes, and ultimately continued OS/2 development on its own.\nWindows NT was the first Windows operating system based on a hybrid kernel. The hybrid kernel was designed as a modified microkernel, influenced by the Mach microkernel developed by Richard Rashid at Carnegie Mellon University, but without meeting all of the criteria of a pure microkernel.\nThe first release of the resulting operating system, Windows NT 3.1 (named to associate it with Windows 3.1) was released in July 1993, with versions for desktop workstations and servers. Windows NT 3.5 was released in September 1994, focusing on performance improvements and support for Novell's NetWare, and was followed up by Windows NT 3.51 in May 1995, which included additional improvements and support for the PowerPC architecture. Windows NT 4.0 was released in June 1996, introducing the redesigned interface of Windows 95 to the NT series. On February 17, 2000, Microsoft released Windows 2000, a successor to NT 4.0. The Windows NT name was dropped at this point in order to put a greater focus on the Windows brand.\nWindows XP.\nThe next major version of Windows NT, Windows XP, was released to manufacturing (RTM) on August 24, 2001, and to the general public on October 25, 2001. The introduction of Windows XP aimed to unify the consumer-oriented Windows 9x series with the architecture introduced by Windows NT, a change which Microsoft promised would provide better performance over its DOS-based predecessors. Windows XP would also introduce a redesigned user interface (including an updated Start menu and a \"task-oriented\" Windows Explorer), streamlined multimedia and networking features, Internet Explorer 6, integration with Microsoft's .NET Passport services, a \"compatibility mode\" to help provide backwards compatibility with software designed for previous versions of Windows, and Remote Assistance functionality.\nAt retail, Windows XP was marketed in two main editions: the \"Home\" edition was targeted towards consumers, while the \"Professional\" edition was targeted towards business environments and power users, and included additional security and networking features. Home and Professional were later accompanied by the \"Media Center\" edition (designed for home theater PCs, with an emphasis on support for DVD playback, TV tuner cards, DVR functionality, and remote controls), and the \"Tablet PC\" edition (designed for mobile devices meeting its specifications for a tablet computer, with support for stylus pen input and additional pen-enabled applications). Mainstream support for Windows XP ended on April 14, 2009. Extended support ended on April 8, 2014.\nAfter Windows 2000, Microsoft also changed its release schedules for server operating systems; the server counterpart of Windows XP, Windows Server 2003, was released in April 2003. It was followed in March 2006, by Windows Server 2003 R2.\nWindows Vista.\nAfter a lengthy development process, Windows Vista was released on November 30, 2006, for volume licensing and January 30, 2007, for consumers. It contained a number of new features, from a redesigned shell and user interface to significant technical changes, with a particular focus on security features. It was available in a number of different editions, and has been subject to some criticism, such as drop of performance, longer boot time, criticism of new UAC, and stricter license agreement. Vista's server counterpart, Windows Server 2008 was released in early 2008.\nWindows 7.\nOn July 22, 2009, Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2 were released to manufacturing (RTM) and released to the public three months later on October 22, 2009. Unlike its predecessor, Windows Vista, which introduced a large number of new features, Windows 7 was intended to be a more focused, incremental upgrade to the Windows line, with the goal of being compatible with applications and hardware with which Windows Vista was already compatible. Windows 7 has multi-touch support, a redesigned Windows shell with an updated taskbar with revealable jump lists that contain shortcuts to files frequently used with specific applications and shortcuts to tasks within the application, a home networking system called HomeGroup, and performance improvements.\nWindows 8 and 8.1.\nWindows 8, the successor to Windows 7, was released generally on October 26, 2012. A number of significant changes were made on Windows 8, including the introduction of a user interface based around Microsoft's Metro design language with optimizations for touch-based devices such as tablets and all-in-one PCs. These changes include the Start screen, which uses large tiles that are more convenient for touch interactions and allow for the display of continually updated information, and a new class of apps which are designed primarily for use on touch-based devices. The new Windows version required a minimum resolution of 1024\u00d7768 pixels, effectively making it unfit for netbooks with 800\u00d7600-pixel screens.\nOther changes include increased integration with cloud services and other online platforms (such as social networks and Microsoft's own OneDrive (formerly SkyDrive) and Xbox Live services), the Windows Store service for software distribution, and a new variant known as Windows RT for use on devices that utilize the ARM architecture, and a new keyboard shortcut for screenshots. An update to Windows 8, called Windows 8.1, was released on October 17, 2013, and includes features such as new live tile sizes, deeper OneDrive integration, and many other revisions. Windows 8 and Windows 8.1 have been subject to some criticism, such as the removal of the Start menu.\nWindows 10.\nOn September 30, 2014, Microsoft announced Windows 10 as the successor to Windows 8.1. It was released on July 29, 2015, and addresses shortcomings in the user interface first introduced with Windows 8. Changes on PC include the return of the Start Menu, a virtual desktop system, and the ability to run Windows Store apps within windows on the desktop rather than in full-screen mode. Windows 10 is said to be available to update from qualified Windows 7 with SP1, Windows 8.1 and Windows Phone 8.1 devices from the Get Windows 10 Application (for Windows 7, Windows 8.1) or Windows Update (Windows 7).\nIn February 2017, Microsoft announced the migration of its Windows source code repository from Perforce to Git. This migration involved 3.5 million separate files in a 300-gigabyte repository. By May 2017, 90 percent of its engineering team was using Git, in about 8500 commits and 1760 Windows builds per day.\nIn June 2021, shortly before Microsoft's announcement of Windows 11, Microsoft updated their lifecycle policy pages for Windows 10, revealing that support for their last release of Windows 10 will end on October 14, 2025. On April 27, 2023, Microsoft announced that version 22H2 would be the last of Windows 10.\nWindows 11.\nOn June 24, 2021, Windows 11 was announced as the successor to Windows 10 during a livestream. The new operating system was designed to be more user-friendly and understandable. It was released on October 5, 2021. As of \u00a02022,[ [update]] Windows 11 is a free upgrade to Windows 10 users who meet the system requirements.\nWindows 365.\nIn July 2021, Microsoft announced it will start selling subscriptions to virtualized Windows desktops as part of a new \"Windows 365\" service in the following month. The new service will allow for cross-platform usage, aiming to make the operating system available for both Apple and Android users. It is a separate service and offers several variations including Windows 365 Frontline, Windows 365 Boot, and the Windows 365 app. The subscription service will be accessible through any operating system with a web browser. The new service is an attempt at capitalizing on the growing trend, fostered during the COVID-19 pandemic, for businesses to adopt a hybrid remote work environment, in which \"employees split their time between the office and home\". As the service will be accessible through web browsers, Microsoft will be able to bypass the need to publish the service through Google Play or the Apple App Store.\nMicrosoft announced Windows 365 availability to business and enterprise customers on August 2, 2021.\nMultilingual support.\nMultilingual support has been built into Windows since Windows 3.0. The language for both the keyboard and the interface can be changed through the Region and Language Control Panel. Components for all supported input languages, such as Input Method Editors, are automatically installed during Windows installation (in Windows XP and earlier, files for East Asian languages, such as Chinese, and files for right-to-left scripts, such as Arabic, may need to be installed separately, also from the said Control Panel). Third-party IMEs may also be installed if a user feels that the provided one is insufficient for their needs. Since Windows 2000, English editions of Windows NT have East Asian IMEs (such as Microsoft Pinyin IME and Microsoft Japanese IME) bundled, but files for East Asian languages may be manually installed on Control Panel.\nInterface languages for the operating system are free for download, but some languages are limited to certain editions of Windows. Language Interface Packs (LIPs) are redistributable and may be downloaded from Microsoft's Download Center and installed for any edition of Windows (XP or later)\u00a0\u2013 they translate most, but not all, of the Windows interface, and require a certain base language (the language which Windows originally shipped with). This is used for most languages in emerging markets. Full Language Packs, which translate the complete operating system, are only available for specific editions of Windows (Ultimate and Enterprise editions of Windows Vista and 7, and all editions of Windows 8, 8.1 and RT except Single Language). They do not require a specific base language and are commonly used for more popular languages such as French or Chinese. These languages cannot be downloaded through the Download Center, but are available as optional updates through the Windows Update service (except Windows 8).\nThe interface language of installed applications is not affected by changes in the Windows interface language. The availability of languages depends on the application developers themselves.\nWindows 8 and Windows Server 2012 introduce a new Language Control Panel where both the interface and input languages can be simultaneously changed, and language packs, regardless of type, can be downloaded from a central location. The PC Settings app in Windows 8.1 and Windows Server 2012 R2 also includes a counterpart settings page for this. Changing the interface language also changes the language of preinstalled Windows Store apps (such as Mail, Maps and News) and certain other Microsoft-developed apps (such as Remote Desktop). The above limitations for language packs are however still in effect, except that full language packs can be installed for any edition except Single Language, which caters to emerging markets.\nPlatform support.\nWindows NT included support for several platforms before the x86-based personal computer became dominant in the professional world. Windows NT 4.0 and its predecessors supported PowerPC, DEC Alpha and MIPS R4000 (although some of the platforms implement 64-bit computing, the OS treated them as 32-bit). Windows 2000 dropped support for all platforms, except the third generation x86 (known as IA-32) or newer in 32-bit mode. The client line of the Windows NT family still ran on IA-32 up to Windows 10 (the server line of the Windows NT family still ran on IA-32 up to Windows Server 2008).\nWith the introduction of the Intel Itanium architecture (IA-64), Microsoft released new versions of Windows to support it. Itanium versions of Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 were released at the same time as their mainstream x86 counterparts. Windows XP 64-Bit Edition (Version 2003), released in 2003, is the last Windows client operating system to support Itanium. Windows Server line continues to support this platform until Windows Server 2012; Windows Server 2008 R2 is the last Windows operating system to support Itanium architecture.\nOn April 25, 2005, Microsoft released Windows XP Professional x64 Edition and Windows Server 2003 x64 editions to support x86-64 (or simply x64), the 64-bit version of x86 architecture. Windows Vista was the first client version of Windows NT to be released simultaneously in IA-32 and x64 editions. As of 2024, x64 is still supported.\nAn edition of Windows 8 known as Windows RT was specifically created for computers with ARM architecture, and while ARM is still used for Windows smartphones with Windows 10, tablets with Windows RT will not be updated. Starting from Windows 10 Fall Creators Update (version 1709) and later includes support for ARM-based PCs.\nWindows CE.\nWindows CE (officially known as \"Windows Embedded Compact\"), is an edition of Windows that runs on minimalistic computers, like satellite navigation systems and some mobile phones. Windows Embedded Compact is based on its own dedicated kernel, dubbed Windows CE kernel. Microsoft licenses Windows CE to OEMs and device makers. The OEMs and device makers can modify and create their own user interfaces and experiences, while Windows CE provides the technical foundation to do so.\nWindows CE was used in the Dreamcast along with Sega's own proprietary OS for the console. Windows CE was the core from which Windows Mobile was derived. Its successor, Windows Phone 7, was based on components from both Windows CE 6.0 R3 and Windows CE 7.0. Windows Phone 8 however, is based on the same NT-kernel as Windows 8.\nWindows Embedded Compact is not to be confused with Windows XP Embedded or Windows NT 4.0 Embedded, modular editions of Windows based on Windows NT kernel.\nXbox OS.\nXbox OS is an unofficial name given to the version of Windows that runs on Xbox consoles. From Xbox One onwards it is an implementation with an emphasis on virtualization (using Hyper-V) as it is three operating systems running at once, consisting of the core operating system, a second implemented for games and a more Windows-like environment for applications.\nMicrosoft updates Xbox One's OS every month, and these updates can be downloaded from the Xbox Live service to the Xbox and subsequently installed, or by using offline recovery images downloaded via a PC. It was originally based on NT 6.2 (Windows 8) kernel, and the latest version runs on an NT 10.0 base. This system is sometimes referred to as \"Windows 10 on Xbox One\".\nXbox One and Xbox Series operating systems also allow limited (due to licensing restrictions and testing resources) backward compatibility with previous generation hardware, and the Xbox 360's system is backwards compatible with the original Xbox.\nVersion control system.\nUp to and including every version before Windows 2000, Microsoft used an in-house version control system named Source Library Manager (SLM). Shortly after Windows 2000 was released, Microsoft switched to a fork of Perforce named Source Depot. This system was used up until 2017 once the system could not keep up with the size of Windows. Microsoft had begun to integrate Git into Team Foundation Server in 2013, but Windows (and Office) continued to rely on Source Depot. The Windows code was divided among 65 different repositories with a kind of virtualization layer to produce unified view of all of the code.\nIn 2017 Microsoft announced that it would start using Git, an open source version control system created by Linus Torvalds, and in May 2017 they reported that the migration into a new Git repository was complete.\nVFSForGit.\nEach Git repository contains a complete history of all the files, which tends to be very large for Windows. Microsoft has been working on a new project called the Virtual File System for Git (VFSForGit) to address these challenges.\nIn 2021 the VFS for Git was superseded by Scalar.\nTimeline of releases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUsage share and device sales.\n&lt;br&gt;\nVersion market share&lt;br&gt;\nAs a percentage of desktop and laptop systems using Microsoft Windows, according to StatCounter data as of November 2025:\nUse of Windows 10 has exceeded Windows 7 globally since early 2018.\nFor desktop and laptop computers, according to Net Applications and StatCounter (which track the use of operating systems in devices that are active on the Web), Windows was the most used operating-system family in August 2021, with around 91% usage share according to Net Applications and around 76% usage share according to StatCounter.\nIncluding personal computers of all kinds (e.g., desktops, laptops, mobile devices, and game consoles), Windows OSes accounted for 32.67% of usage share in August 2021, compared to Android (highest, at 46.03%), iOS's 13.76%, iPadOS's 2.81%, and macOS's 2.51%, according to Net Applications and 30.73% of usage share in August 2021, compared to Android (highest, at 42.56%), iOS/iPadOS's 16.53%, and macOS's 6.51%, according to StatCounter.\nThose statistics do not include servers (including cloud computing, where Linux has significantly more market share than Windows) as Net Applications and StatCounter use web browsing as a proxy for all use.\nSecurity.\nEarly versions of Windows were designed at a time when malware and networking were less common, and had few built-in security features; they did not provide access privileges to allow a user to prevent other users from accessing their files, and they did not provide memory protection to prevent one process from reading or writing another process's address space or to prevent a process from code or data used by privileged-mode code.\nWhile the Windows 9x series offered the option of having profiles for multiple users with separate profiles and home folders, it had no concept of access privileges, allowing any user to edit others' files. In addition, while it ran separate 32-bit applications in separate address spaces, protecting an application's code and data from being read or written by another application, it did not protect the first megabyte of memory from userland applications for compatibility reasons. This area of memory contains code critical to the functioning of the operating system, and by writing into this area of memory an application can crash or freeze the operating system. This was a source of instability as faulty applications could accidentally write into this region, potentially corrupting important operating system memory, which usually resulted in some form of system error and halt.\nWindows NT was far more secure, implementing access privileges and full memory protection, and, while 32-bit programs meeting the DoD's C2 security rating, yet these advantages were nullified by the fact that, prior to Windows Vista, the default user account created during the setup process was an administrator account; the user, and any program the user launched, had full access to the machine. Though Windows XP did offer an option of turning administrator accounts into limited accounts, the majority of home users did not do so, partially due to the number of programs which required administrator rights to function properly. As a result, most home users still ran as administrator all the time. These architectural flaws, combined with Windows's very high popularity, made Windows a frequent target of computer worm and virus writers.\nFurthermore, although Windows NT and its successors are designed for security (including on a network) and multi-user PCs, they were not initially designed with Internet security in mind as much, since, when it was first developed in the early 1990s, Internet use was less prevalent.\nIn a 2002 strategy memo entitled \"Trustworthy computing\" sent to every Microsoft employee, Bill Gates declared that security should become Microsoft's highest priority.\nWindows Vista introduced a privilege elevation system called User Account Control. When logging in as a standard user, a logon session is created and a token containing only the most basic privileges is assigned. In this way, the new logon session is incapable of making changes that would affect the entire system. When logging in as a user in the Administrators group, two separate tokens are assigned. The first token contains all privileges typically awarded to an administrator, and the second is a restricted token similar to what a standard user would receive. User applications, including the Windows shell, are then started with the restricted token, resulting in a reduced privilege environment even under an Administrator account. When an application requests higher privileges or \"Run as administrator\" is clicked, UAC will prompt for confirmation and, if consent is given (including administrator credentials if the account requesting the elevation is not a member of the administrators group), start the process using the unrestricted token.\nLeaked documents from 2013 to 2016 codenamed Vault 7 detail the capabilities of the CIA to perform electronic surveillance and cyber warfare, such as the ability to compromise operating systems such as Windows.\nIn August 2019, computer experts reported that the BlueKeep security vulnerability, CVE-, that potentially affects older unpatched Windows versions via the program's Remote Desktop Protocol, allowing for the possibility of remote code execution, may include related flaws, collectively named \"DejaBlue\", affecting newer Windows versions (i.e., Windows 7 and all recent versions) as well. In addition, experts reported a Microsoft security vulnerability, CVE-, based on legacy code involving Microsoft CTF and ctfmon (ctfmon.exe), that affects all Windows versions from Windows XP to the then most recent Windows 10 versions; a patch to correct the flaw is available.\nMicrosoft releases security patches through its Windows Update service approximately once a month (usually the second Tuesday of the month), although critical updates are made available at shorter intervals when necessary. Versions subsequent to Windows 2000 SP3 and Windows XP implemented automatic download and installation of updates, substantially increasing the number of users installing security updates.\nWindows integrates the Windows Defender antivirus, which is seen as one of the best available. Windows also implements Secure Boot, Control Flow Guard, ransomware protection, BitLocker disk encryption, a firewall, and Windows SmartScreen.\nIn July 2024, Microsoft signalled an intention to limit kernel access and improve overall security, following a highly publicised CrowdStrike update that caused 8.5 million Windows PCs to crash. Part of that initiative is to rewrite parts of Windows in Rust, a memory-safe language.\nFile permissions.\nAll Windows versions from Windows NT 3 have been based on a file system permission system referred to as AGDLP (Accounts, Global, Domain Local, Permissions) in which file permissions are applied to the file/folder in the form of a 'local group' which then has other 'global groups' as members. These global groups then hold other groups or users depending on different Windows versions used. This system varies from other vendor products such as Linux and NetWare due to the 'static' allocation of permission being applied directly to the file or folder. However using this process of AGLP/AGDLP/AGUDLP allows a small number of static permissions to be applied and allows for easy changes to the account groups without reapplying the file permissions on the files and folders.\nAlternative implementations.\nOwing to the operating system's popularity, a number of applications have been released that aim to provide compatibility with Windows applications, either as a compatibility layer for another operating system, or as a standalone system that can run software written for Windows out of the box. These include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18892", "revid": "50945283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18892", "title": "Mojo bag", "text": "Magical amulet bag in Hoodoo tradition\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Subinfobox bodystyle/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA mojo bag (), in the African American spiritual tradition called Hoodoo, is an amulet consisting of a flannel bag containing one or more magical items. It is a \"prayer in a bag\", or a spell that can be carried with or on the host's body. Alternative American names for the mojo bag include a toby, lucky hand, nation sack, conjure bag, and a package. Other forms of African American amulet bags include the gris-gris and juju bags.\nWith an origin among the Kongo people in Central Africa, the word \"mojo\" also refers to a form of conjure, Hoodoo, and charm work. Mojo containers have been fashioned as bags, gourds, jars, bottles, shells, and canes. The making of mojo bags is a system of African American occult magic that involves housing charms or spirits inside of a bag for protection and healing. Other times mojo bags are created to manifest results in a person's life, such as good-luck, money or love.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"mojo\" is derived from the Kikongo word \"mooyo\", meaning \"to the spirits that dwelt within magical charms.\" It refers to the cavity of a nkisi, where magical items are normally stored\".\"\nSemantic change of the word.\nWhile the word \"mojo\" refers to magic and a conjure bag in traditional Gullah spirituality, it underwent a semantic change in American popular culture at the beginning of the twentieth century and came to refer to sexuality and virility. Musicians began to use the word \"mojo\" outside of its original context within African American culture. Mojo has also come to mean motivation in general. \nHistory and ideology.\nCentral and West Africans practiced the spiritual art of creating conjure bags for protection, healing and to communicate with spirits. Historians of the time noted that they were frequently worn by non-believers and believers alike, and were also found attached to buildings. The word \"conjure\" is considered by some to be an alternative to the word \"mojo\". Because of this, a mojo bag is also referred to as a conjure bag and hoodoo bag, usually made by a respected community conjure doctor.\nCentral African influence.\nThe Bakongo people of the Congo River region created medicine bags using leather or cloth and placed feathers, animal parts, roots, herbs and other ingredients for protection. When Bakongo people were enslaved in the United States, the practice transitioned continued in African American communities and became an essential custom in Hoodoo tradition. Mojo items were hung from trees, tied to a string, worn underneath the clothes in hopes of achieving the desired outcome for the user.\nThe nkisi is one example of a mojo container made by hand from a root doctor. Spirits are contained in a bag, gourd, shells and other containers. \"Nkisi\" bags, which looked similar to mojo bags, are believed to be an ancestor of the mojo bags in American Hoodoo. The spiritual philosophy of the mojo bag also has Bakongo influence. In traditional Bakongo religion, simbi spirits can inhabit an nkisi bag for healing or protecting an individual or a community. The \"Nganga\" creates the bag for an individual using ingredients specific to a certain simbi to invoke it into the bag.\nIn these U.S., these Nganga conjurers were easily identified by the way they dressed, their demeanor, and charms, by the mojo bags worn by the individual. Some practitioners concealed their charms while others, who were in the business of conjure, sometimes wore their charms and mojo bags on the outside of their clothes.\nWest African variations.\nIn West Africa, similar conjure bags are called \"juju\" and \"gris-gris.\" The word \"juju\" comes from the Hausa language, while \"gris-gris\" has origins in Mande communities and is associated with Afro-Islamic mystical traditions. The practice of using gris-gris was translocated to the United States with enslaved Africans and was incorporated by practitioners of Louisiana Voodoo and Hoodoo in the United States. Originally the gris-gris was adorned with Islamic scripture and was used to ward off evil, djinn spirits or bad luck. The Mandinka people were the first Muslim ethnic group imported from Sierra Leone to the Americas. They were known for their conjure bags called gris-gris and carried the talismans with them when they boarded slave ships heading to the Americas. Enslaved Muslims were sought out for conjure services requesting them to make gris-gris bags for protection against their enslavers and other dangers.\nAmerican adaptation.\nDuring the Atlantic slave trade, some enslaved Africans were able to conceal their conjure bags before they boarded slave ships heading to the Americas. Gullah Jack, an enslaved man from Angola, carried a mojo bag onto a slave ship leaving Zanzibar and brought it with him to the United States. Even after he arrived, he was known for carrying mojo for his spiritual protection.\nThose principles of Bakongo religion that early Africans, like Gullah Jack, reinforced are what influenced the later creation of mojo bags in the United States for centuries to come. Certain natural and animal ingredients, such as animal bones, animal teeth, claws, and graveyard dirt were deemed necessary to contain a simbi spirit or an ancestral spirit inside of the bag for protection and healing. With the weaving of traditional African concepts, such as the Bakongo cosmogram, Kongo Christianity, Native American herbalism, American Protestantism, and Hoodoo tradition, African Americans were able to reimagine and reshape the mojo bag to address their new needs in a new land. However, beliefs were maintained, with Black people in the American South also observing the connection between the Christian cross and the Bakongo cosmogram. The cross continued to be viewed as an nkisi that harnessed the spirit of Jesus on the cross that could be invoked in rituals for healing or protection and for the removal of sorcery.\nIn the United States, mojos are used to ground spirits in certain locations to prevent the spirits of the dead from coming back and haunting the living by placing the last items they touched on top of their graves. The last items touched by the dead are also placed inside mojo bags to carry the spirit of the deceased with the living for protection. A mojo can be a bottle-tree charm, spirit jugs or memorial jugs to capture spirits inside containers to house their spirit to later work with the spirit in rituals.\nArcheologists in New York discovered continued West-Central African burial practices in a section of Lower Manhattan, New York City which is now the location of the African Burial Ground National Monument. Historians and archeologists found Kongo related artifacts at the African Burial Ground such as minkisi and nkisi conjure bundles buried with African remains. These nkisi and minkisi bundles became the conjure bags in Hoodoo.\nAt Hermitage plantation in Nashville, Tennessee, archeologists discovered continued Central African traditions of using hexagonal glass beads for fertility and other spiritual purposes. Other charms found were mojo hands, lucky roots, raccoon penis bones, ceramics, and blue beads. These items found in a slave cabin showed enslaved African Americans used local roots and created mojo hands for protection and healing. Enslaved African Americans at Hermitage plantation used prehistoric artifacts for charms to draw spiritual power from ancient artifacts. In addition, archeologists found Kongo cosmograms engraved onto limestone marbles for spiritual power. The charms were used to protect from conjure and remove sorcery and reverse curses back onto the conjurer. The knowledge of charm bags was shared and passed down orally amongst people in the slave community.\nThe word \"hand\" in this context is defined as a combination of ingredients. The term may derive from the use of finger and hand bones from the dead in mojo bags, or from ingredients such as the lucky hand root, which was favored by gamblers. The latter suggests an analogy between the varied bag ingredients and the several cards that make up a hand in card games. Like their ancestors, African Americans continued to use mojo, believing it would provide protection and favor.\nMaking a mojo.\nMost Southern-style conjure bags are made of red flannel material. The use of red flannel bags for mojo bags was influenced by the Bakongo people's minkisi in Central Africa, and in Hoodoo red symbolizes protection from evil and spiritual power. Research from the National Museum of African American History and Culture explained that the color red symbolizes sacrifice, transition and power in countries where the belief in mojo was common, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of Congo and Gabon. Other times when red cloth was not available, African Americans used whatever cloth they had to create a conjure bag. The contents of each bag vary directly with the aim of the conjurer. For example, a mojo carried for love-drawing will contain different ingredients than one for gambling luck or magical protection. Ingredients can include graveyard dirt, roots, herbs, animal parts, minerals, coins, crystals, good luck tokens, and carved amulets. The more personalized objects are used to add extra power because of their symbolic value. \nTo house spirits of the dead inside mojo bags, jars, packets, and other containers and charms, graveyard dirt from a deceased person's burial plot is used. Spirits of the dead can protect a person from physical and spiritual harm. The conjurer prepares the graveyard dirt with certain incantations, prayers, Biblical or Quranic scriptures and other ingredients to instruct the spirit to heal or protect a person. Historians have traced this practice to the Bakongo people, who utilized graveyard dirt to house spirits of the dead, animal spirits, or ancestral spirits inside conjure bags for healing or protection. African Americans during slavery and freedom combined Native American herbal knowledge with African spirituality. Enslaved and free Africans upon arrival to the United States used North American herbs, and roots to create conjure bags. However, they applied an African interpretation in the preparation of herbal ingredients by creating nkisi and performing African religious rituals in the preparation of spiritual medicines.\nA former slave from Texas said to make a conjure bag African Americans \"would take hair and brass nails and thimbles and needles and mix them up in a conjure bag.\" Prince Johnson, a former slave from Mississippi, said his slaveholder would inspect her slaves to make sure they did not have any charms underneath their clothes. An oral account from Patsy Moses, a former slave from Texas, mentioned the use of red flannel cloth to make conjure bags using frog bones to protect from an enemy. Other Texas slave narratives showed that red flannel cloth was commonly used to make mojo bags incorporating frog bones, snake skins, and roots to protect from their enemies and remove curses. Some mojo bags were made to cause harm and bad luck for slaveholders, and other mojo bags were for protection depending on the ingredients used by the root worker. William Webb made mojo bags for enslaved people in Kentucky to keep the peace between the enslaved and their enslavers. Webb instructed the enslaved to gather roots from their local environment and place them in conjure bags and pray over them to keep the spiritual magic of the mojo bags active.\nUses of mojo.\nThere are records of African American ministers and church members in Black churches in Virginia and South Carolina were known by the members of their congregation and in the slave community to conjure spirits, speak to the spirits of the dead and carry and make mojo bags. After the American Civil War, some African American ministers and church members continued to rely on Hoodoo and make mojo bags and saw no contradiction in their practice with Christianity. One African American church minister relied on a conjurer to make him a mojo bag to attract more members to his church. For four years, the minister relied on the mojo bag to increase the membership of his church. Every Sunday, the church pews were filled. After four years, the minister did not feel comfortable depending on the spirit of a mojo bag and not the Christian God to grow his church. The minister threw away the mojo bag; when he did, people stopped coming to his church. These written accounts showed that African Americans who identified as Christian continued to believe and practice African spirituality and some African American Christians relied on Hoodoo when experiencing tough times in life. \nConjurers made money making and selling mojo bags as a full-time business. Dr. Jim Jordan was a conjure doctor in North Carolina and became a multi-millionaire by providing conjure services to people all over the United States during the Jim Crow era. He owned a conjure Hoodoo store and provided medicinal and spiritual healing to his clients using charms and herbal remedies. Another version of a mojo bag is a \"prayer cloth.\" Prayer cloths are white church cloths imbued with spiritual power from a pastor of a church. A pastor prays over the cloth speaking the power of God into the cloth with prayer and anointing of Holy Oil and functions like a mojo bag. Church members take prayer cloths with them in their purses or placed under their beds for protection. This modified version of a mojo bag is mostly found in African American churches.The creation of mojo bags in Hoodoo is a Central African practice brought to the United States by enslaved Africans. A few enslaved Africans brought their conjure bags (mojo bags) with them from Africa when they boarded slave ships heading to North America. African American quilt makers sewed mojo hands into quilts for protection. This practice originates among Central African peoples such as the Bakongo, who adapted the practice of nkisi into the creation of the \"Pineapple quilt,\" which establish the widespread technique from Mississippi and Alabama to Connecticut. Enslaved on plantations and continued to practice their traditions by sewing mojo hands into their quilts.\nOn slave plantations in the United States, the creators of mojo became the root workers, conjure doctors, and Hoodoo doctors in enslaved and free African American communities. Enslaved and free black root workers created mojo bags and placed Bible verses, petition papers, roots, herbs, animal parts, graveyard dirt, and other ingredients to conjure a negative or positive effect. They used either Christian prayers to spirituality charge the mojo bag. During slavery, many of the mojo bags created were for protection against a harsh slaveholder. The petition papers placed inside a mojo bag can have either a Bible verse, symbols, and other characters to conjure a positive or negative magical result. After the Civil War, mojo bags were created in Black American communities for protection from law enforcement, to attract love, protection, money, employment, or to communicate with spirits. Folklorist Newbell Niles Puckett documented a mojo practice of an African American cook in the Mississippi Delta. The African American cook had a mojo bag with a \"lizard's tail, rabbit's foot, a fish eye, snake skins, a beetle, and a dime with a hole in it.\" This mojo bag was worn by the cook for good-luck. \nOther conjure bundles in the hoodoo tradition are hanged on the side of the door or beds where people sleep to protect from conjure. Conjurers made a goofer bag with goofer-root, cloth, strands of hair, needles, and graveyard dirt. To add potency to conjure bundles the hair from a camel was added. It is believed that walking over a buried mojo bag would \"goofer\" the individual. Black conjure women make mojo bags for their female clients to prevent their men from having sexual relationships with other women.\nTraditionally, a client consulted with a root worker to know what kind of mojo he or she needed as not all mojos are the same, as one mojo can not work for everyone. Each person needs a different mojo. In traditional Hoodoo, if there are several people needing love, the root worker or conjurer created different mojos for each of their clients. One mojo created the same can not work for everyone. By the twentieth century, Hoodoo was culturally appropriated by white merchants that profited from Black spiritual culture. Spiritual shops sold the same mojo to their customers. In traditional Hoodoo, certain songs, prayers, symbols, and ingredients are used to conjure or manifest results. After Hoodoo was appropriated, the same mojo was sold to consumers. \"For Hoodoo practitioners looking to sell their goods, it has therefore become more profitable to rely 'on stereotypes of\u2026[H]oodoo to attract their primarily white clientele' (ibid.) than to promote the sale of historically accurate ritual objects that appeal to modern, African American practitioners of Hoodoo. Additionally, white shop owners seem to dominate the mainstream Hoodoo market, undermining the ability of African American people to rely on their religious beliefs to assure their economic empowerment.\"\nAfrican American practitioners from the Millennial and Gen Z generations are incorporating new techniques such as the use of various crystals in the creation of mojo bags and using tarot cards for divination to consult with spirit. The creation of mojo bags is an individualized practice based on regional ingredients and ingredients purchased in stores and online.\nMaintenance.\nFixing and feeding a mojo hand.\nThere is a process to fixing a proper mojo. A ritual must be put in place in order to successfully prepare a mojo by being filled and awakened to life. This can be done by smoking incense and candles, or it may be breathed upon to bring it to life. Prayers may be said, and other methods may be used to accomplish this essential step. Once prepared, the mojo is \"dressed\" or \"fed\" with a liquid such as alcohol, perfume, water, or bodily fluids. The reason it is said to feed the mojo to keep it working is that it is alive with spirit. One story from the work entitled \"From My People\" describes a slave who went out and sought a mojo conjurer that gave him a mojo to run away from home. The story describes the slave's mojo as fixing him into many formations, and he ultimately dies because he misuses its power. Had he fixed and believed in the specific mojo himself, he might have escaped the plantation alive.\nHiding the mojo.\nMojos are traditionally made for an individual and so must be concealed on the person at all times. Men usually keep the trinkets hidden in the pants pocket, while women are more prone to clip it to the bra. They are also commonly pinned to clothes below the waist. Depending on the type of mojo, the hiding place will be crucial to its success, as those who make conjure bags to carry love spells sometimes specify that the mojo must be worn next to the skin. A story from the book \"From My People\" described the story of Moses and the task he went through to bring his people out of slavery. It described how \"Hoodoo Lost his Hand,\" as Moses's mojo was hidden through his staff. When he turned it into a snake, the pharaoh made his soothsayers and magicians create the same effect. As a result, the Pharaoh's snake was killed by Moses's snake, and that is how Hoodoo lost his hand.\nMojo bags in blues music.\nBlues is a genre of music created in the United States by African Americans in the mid-nineteenth century that incorporates spirituals, African American work songs, slave shout songs, field hollers and call-and-response. Several blues singers created songs about mojo bags. Lightening Hopkins has an album called Mojo Hand. Will Shade and the Memphis Jug Band performed a song titled \"Aunt Caroline Dyer Blues.\" The lyrics of the song speak of a man going to Newport, Arkansas to see Auntie Caroline. She's described as a fortune-telling woman, who can whip him up a mojo bag, so that he can strut his stuff around town and not live so rough. Johnny Temple also wrote his 1937 hit \"Hoodoo Woman\" about Auntie Caroline's legendary mojos. The lyrics of him standing on a mountain in Jerusalem, Arkansas and then going to Newport, Arkansas to seek a mojo from her.\nIn Robert Johnson's 1937 song \"Come On in My Kitchen,\" he describes losing his woman as a result of stealing coins from her nation sack. The Preston \"Red\" Foster penned song \"Got My Mojo Working,\" recorded by Ann Cole in 1956 and by Muddy Waters the following year, spoke about the spiritual power of the mojo bag. Junior Wells released an album in 1965 called \"Hoodoo Man Blues\". In the title song, Wells explained that he traveled to Louisiana and saw a Hoodoo practitioner to make him a mojo bag to get back his girlfriend who had left him for another man.\nZora Neale Hurston.\nIn the 1930s, Zora Neale Hurston documented African Americans in the South creating mojo bags using roots, herbs, and animal parts in the Hoodoo tradition. In 1935, Hurston published what she learned about mojo culture in her book titled, \"Mules and Men.\"\nSlave narratives.\nIn the 1930s, the Federal Writers' Project part of the Works Progress Administration during the Great Depression, provided jobs for unemployed writers to write and collect the experiences of former slaves. Writers, black and white, documented the experiences of the last generation of African Americans born into slavery. Former African American slaves told writers about their slave experience which provided readers a glimpse into the lives of the enslaved. Slave narratives revealed the culture of African Americans during slavery. African American former slaves talked about conjure, rootwork, and Hoodoo. These narratives revealed how enslaved African Americans made mojo bags for protection against their enslavers and conjure. Other slave narratives explained how African Americans in slavery and freedom made mojo charms to stop nose bleeds and reverse and prevent illness. The Library of Congress has 2,300 first-person accounts from former slaves in their digital archive.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18894", "revid": "41343408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18894", "title": "Matt Groening", "text": "American cartoonist and animator (born 1954)\nMatthew Abram Groening ( ; born February 15, 1954) is an American cartoonist and animator. He is the creator of the television series \"The Simpsons\" (1989\u2013present), \"Futurama\" (1999\u20132003, 2008\u20132013, 2023\u2013present), and \"Disenchantment\" (2018\u20132023), and the comic strip \"Life in Hell\" (1977\u20132012).\nBorn in Portland, Oregon, Groening made his first professional cartoon sale of \"Life in Hell\" to the avant-garde magazine \"Wet\" in 1978. At its peak, it was carried in 250 weekly newspapers and caught the attention of the producer James L. Brooks, who contacted Groening in 1985 about adapting it for animated sequences for the Fox variety show \"The Tracey Ullman Show\". Fearing the loss of ownership rights, Groening created a new set of characters, the Simpson family. The shorts were spun off into their own series, \"The Simpsons\", which became the longest-running American primetime television series and the longest-running American animated series and sitcom.\nIn 1997, Groening and former \"Simpsons\" writer David X. Cohen developed \"Futurama\", an animated series about life in the year 3000, which premiered in 1999. It ran for four years on Fox, was picked up in 2008 by Comedy Central for another 5 years, and was picked up again by Hulu in 2023. In 2016, Groening developed a series for Netflix, \"Disenchantment\", which premiered in August 2018.\nGroening has won 14 Primetime Emmy Awards, 12 for \"The Simpsons\" and 2 for \"Futurama,\" and a British Comedy Award for \"outstanding contribution to comedy\" in 2004. In 2002, he won the National Cartoonist Society Reuben Award for his work on \"Life in Hell\". He received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on February 14, 2012.\nEarly life and education.\nMatthew Abram Groening was born on February 15, 1954, in Portland, Oregon, the middle of five children (older sister Patty and brother Mark were born in 1943 and 1950, and younger sisters Lisa and Maggie in 1956 and 1958, respectively). His Norwegian American mother, Margaret Ruth (\"n\u00e9e\" Wiggum; March 23, 1919\u00a0\u2013 April 22, 2013), was once a teacher, and his Canadian Mennonite father, Homer Philip Groening (December 30, 1919\u00a0\u2013 March 15, 1996), was a filmmaker, advertiser, writer and cartoonist. Homer, born in Main Centre, Saskatchewan, Canada, grew up in a Plautdietsch-speaking family.\nGroening's grandfather, Abram A. Groening, was a professor at Tabor College, a Mennonite Brethren liberal arts college in Hillsboro, Kansas, before moving to Albany College (now known as Lewis and Clark College) in Oregon in 1930.\nGroening was raised in Portland and attended Ainsworth Elementary School and Lincoln High School. Following his high school graduation in 1972, Groening attended The Evergreen State College in Olympia, Washington, a liberal arts school that he described as \"a hippie college, with no grades or required classes, that drew every weirdo in the Northwest.\" He served as the editor of the campus newspaper, \"The Cooper Point Journal\", for which he also wrote articles and drew cartoons. Groening graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in journalism in 1977. He befriended fellow cartoonist Lynda Barry after discovering that she had written a fan letter to Joseph Heller, one of Groening's favorite authors, and had received a reply. Groening has credited Barry with being \"probably [his] biggest inspiration.\" He first became interested in cartoons after watching the Disney animated film \"One Hundred and One Dalmatians\" as well as Monty Python.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nIn 1977, at age 23, Groening moved to Los Angeles to become a writer. He went through several jobs, including being an extra in the television film \"When Every Day Was the Fourth of July\", busing tables, washing dishes at a nursing home, clerking at the Hollywood Licorice Pizza record store, landscaping in a sewage treatment plant, and chauffeuring and ghostwriting for a retired director of Western films.\n\"Life in Hell\".\nGroening described life in Los Angeles to his friends in the form of the self-published comic book \"Life in Hell\", which was loosely inspired by the chapter \"How to Go to Hell\" in Walter Kaufmann's book \"Critique of Religion and Philosophy\". Groening distributed the comic book in the book corner of Licorice Pizza, a record store in which he worked. He made his first professional cartoon sale to the avant-garde \"Wet\" magazine in 1978. The strip, titled \"Forbidden Words\", appeared in the September/October issue of that year.\nGroening had gained employment at the \"Los Angeles Reader\", a newly formed alternative newspaper, delivering papers, typesetting, editing and answering phones. He showed his cartoons to the editor, James Vowell, who was impressed and eventually gave him a spot in the paper. \"Life in Hell\" made its official debut as a comic strip in the \"Reader\" on April 25, 1980. Vowell also gave Groening his own weekly music column, \"Sound Mix\", in 1982. However, the column would rarely actually be about music, as he would often write about his \"various enthusiasms, obsessions, pet peeves and problems\" instead. In an effort to add more music to the column, he \"just made stuff up\", concocting and reviewing fictional bands and nonexistent records. In the following week's column, he would confess to fabricating everything in the previous column and swear that everything in the new column was true. Eventually, he was finally asked to give up the \"music\" column. Among the fans of the column was Harry Shearer, who would later become a voice actor on \"The Simpsons\".\n\"Life in Hell\" became popular almost immediately. In November 1984, Deborah Caplan, Groening's then-girlfriend and co-worker at the \"Reader\", offered to publish \"Love Is Hell\", a series of relationship-themed \"Life in Hell\" strips, in book form. Released a month later, the book was an underground success, selling 22,000 copies in its first two printings. \"Work Is Hell\" soon followed, also published by Caplan. Soon afterward, Caplan and Groening left and put together the Life in Hell Co., which handled merchandising for \"Life in Hell\". Groening also started Acme Features Syndicate, which initially syndicated \"Life in Hell\" as well as work by Lynda Barry and John Callahan, but would eventually only syndicate \"Life in Hell\". At the end of its run, \"Life in Hell\" was carried in 250 weekly newspapers and has been anthologized in a series of books, including \"School Is Hell\", \"Childhood Is Hell\", \"The Big Book of Hell\", and \"The Huge Book of Hell\". Although Groening previously stated, \"I'll never give up the comic strip. It's my foundation,\" the June 16, 2012, strip marked \"Life in Hell\"'s conclusion. After Groening ended the strip, the Center for Cartoon Studies commissioned a poster that was presented to Groening in honor of his work. The poster contained tribute cartoons by 22 of Groening's cartoonist friends who were influenced by \"Life in Hell\".\n\"The Simpsons\".\nCreation.\n\"Life in Hell\" caught the attention of Hollywood writer-director-producer and Gracie Films founder James L. Brooks, who had been shown the strip by fellow producer Polly Platt. In 1985, Brooks contacted Groening with the proposition of working in animation on an undefined future project, which would turn out to be developing a series of short animated skits, called \"bumpers,\" for the Fox variety show \"The Tracey Ullman Show\". Originally, Brooks wanted Groening to adapt his \"Life in Hell\" characters for the show. Groening feared that he would have to give up his ownership rights, and that the show would fail and take down his comic strip with it. Groening conceived of the idea for the Simpsons in the lobby of James L. Brooks's office and hurriedly sketched out his version of a dysfunctional family: Homer, the overweight father; Marge, the slim mother; Bart, the miscreant oldest child; Lisa, the intelligent middle child; and Maggie, the baby. Groening famously named the main Simpson characters after members of his own family: his parents, Homer and Marge (for Groening's mother it was short for Margaret and the cartoon character Marge is short for Marjorie), and his younger sisters, Lisa and Margaret (Maggie). Claiming that it was a bit too obvious to name a character after himself, he chose the name \"Bart\", an anagram of brat. However, he stresses that aside from some of the sibling rivalry, his family is nothing like the Simpsons. Groening also has an older brother and sister, Mark and Patty, and in a 1995 interview Groening divulged that Mark \"is the actual inspiration for Bart.\" \nMaggie Groening has co-written a few \"Simpsons\" books featuring her cartoon namesake.\n\"The Tracey Ullman Show\".\nThe family was crudely drawn, because Groening had submitted basic sketches to the animators, assuming they would clean them up; instead, they just traced over his drawings. The entire Simpson family was designed so that they would be recognizable in silhouette. When Groening originally designed Homer, he put his own initials into the character's hairline and ear: the hairline resembled an 'M', and the right ear resembled a 'G'. Groening decided that this would be too distracting though, and redesigned the ear to look normal. He still draws the ear as a 'G' when he draws pictures of Homer for fans. Marge's distinct beehive hairstyle was inspired by \"Bride of Frankenstein\" and the style that Margaret Groening wore during the 1960s, although her hair was never blue. Bart's original design, which appeared in the first shorts, had spikier hair, and the spikes were of different lengths. The number was later limited to nine spikes, all of the same size. At the time Groening was primarily drawing in black and \"not thinking that [Bart] would eventually be drawn in color\" gave him spikes that appear to be an extension of his head. Lisa's physical features are generally not used in other characters; for example, in the later seasons, no character other than Maggie shares her hairline. While designing Lisa, Groening \"couldn't be bothered to even think about girls' hair styles\". When designing Lisa and Maggie, he \"just gave them this kind of spiky starfish hair style, not thinking that they would eventually be drawn in color\". Groening storyboarded and scripted every short (now known as \"The Simpsons shorts\"), which were then animated by a team including David Silverman and Wes Archer, both of whom would later become directors on the series.\nThe Simpsons shorts first appeared in \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" on April 19, 1987. Another family member, Grampa Simpson, was introduced in the later shorts. Years later, during the early seasons of \"The Simpsons\", when it came time to give Grampa a first name, Groening says he refused to name him after his own grandfather, Abraham Groening, leaving it to other writers to choose a name. By coincidence, they chose \"Abraham\", unaware that it was the name of Groening's grandfather.\nSeries.\nAlthough \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" was not a big hit, the popularity of the shorts led to a half-hour spin-off in 1989. A team of production companies adapted \"The Simpsons\" into a half-hour series for the Fox Broadcasting Company. The team included what is now the Klasky-Csupo animation house. James L. Brooks negotiated a provision in the contract with the Fox network that prevented Fox from interfering with the show's content. Groening said his goal in creating the show was to offer the audience an alternative to what he called \"the mainstream trash\" that they were watching. The half-hour series premiered on December 17, 1989, with \"Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire\", a Christmas special. \"Some Enchanted Evening\" was the first full-length episode produced, but it did not broadcast until May 1990, as the last episode of the first season, because of animation problems.\nThe series quickly became a worldwide phenomenon, to the surprise of many. Groening said: \"Nobody thought \"The Simpsons\" was going to be a big hit. It sneaked up on everybody.\" \"The Simpsons\" was co-developed by Groening, Brooks, and Sam Simon, a writer-producer with whom Brooks had worked on previous projects. Groening and Simon, however, did not get along and were often in conflict over the show; Groening once described their relationship as \"very contentious.\" Simon eventually left the show in 1993 over creative differences.\nLike the main family members, several characters from the show have names that were inspired by people, locations or films. The name \"Wiggum\" for police chief Chief Wiggum is Groening's mother's maiden name. The names of a few other characters were taken from street names in Groening's hometown of Portland, Oregon, including Flanders, Lovejoy, Powell, Quimby and Kearney. Despite common fan belief that Sideshow Bob Terwilliger was named after SW Terwilliger Boulevard in Portland, he was actually named after the character Dr. Terwilliker from the film \"The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T.\".\nAlthough Groening has pitched a number of spin-offs from \"The Simpsons\", those attempts have been unsuccessful. In 1994, Groening and other \"Simpsons\" producers pitched a live-action spin-off about Krusty the Clown (with Dan Castellaneta playing the lead role), but were unsuccessful in getting it off the ground. Groening has also pitched \"Young Homer\" and a spin-off about the non-Simpsons citizens of Springfield.\nIn 1995, Groening got into a major disagreement with Brooks and other \"Simpsons\" producers over \"A Star Is Burns\", a crossover episode with \"The Critic\", an animated show also produced by Brooks and staffed with many former \"Simpsons\" crew members. Groening claimed that he feared viewers would \"see it as nothing but a pathetic attempt to advertise \"The Critic\" at the expense of \"The Simpsons\",\" and was concerned about the possible implication that he had created or produced \"The Critic\". He requested his name be taken off the episode.\nGroening is credited with writing or co-writing the episodes \"Some Enchanted Evening\", \"The Telltale Head\", \"Colonel Homer\" and \"22 Short Films About Springfield\". He also co-wrote and produced \"The Simpsons Movie\", released in 2007. He has had several cameo appearances in the show, with him having done a speaking role for his animated counterpart in the episode \"My Big Fat Geek Wedding\". He currently serves at \"The Simpsons\" as an executive producer and creative consultant.\n\"Futurama\".\nAfter spending a few years researching science fiction, Groening got together with \"Simpsons\" writer and producer David X. Cohen (known as David S. Cohen at the time) in 1997 and developed \"Futurama\", an animated series about life in the year 3000. By the time they pitched the series to Fox in April 1998, Groening and Cohen had composed many characters and storylines; Groening claimed they had gone \"overboard\" in their discussions. Groening described trying to get the show on the air as \"by far the worst experience of [his] grown-up life.\" The show premiered on March 28, 1999. Groening's writing credits for the show are for the premiere episode, \"Space Pilot 3000\" (co-written with Cohen), \"Rebirth\" (story) and \"In-A-Gadda-Da-Leela\" (story).\nAfter four years on the air, the show was canceled by Fox. In a situation similar to \"Family Guy\", however, strong DVD sales and very stable ratings on Adult Swim brought \"Futurama\" back to life. When Comedy Central began negotiating for the rights to air \"Futurama\" reruns, Fox suggested that there was a possibility of also creating new episodes. When Comedy Central committed to sixteen new episodes, it was decided that four straight-to-DVD films\u2014' (2007), ' (2008), ' (2008) and ' (2009)\u2014would be produced.\nSince no new \"Futurama\" projects were in production, the movie \"Into the Wild Green Yonder\" was designed to stand as the \"Futurama\" series finale. However, Groening had expressed a desire to continue the \"Futurama\" franchise in some form, including as a theatrical film. In an interview with CNN, Groening said that \"we have a great relationship with Comedy Central and we would love to do more episodes for them, but I don't know... We're having discussions and there is some enthusiasm but I can't tell if it's just me\". Comedy Central commissioned an additional 26 new episodes, and began airing them in 2010. The show continued in to 2013, before Comedy Central announced in April 2013 that they would not be renewing it beyond its seventh season. The final episode aired on September 4, 2013.\nOn February 9, 2022 the series was revived at Hulu, with the eighth season premiering on July 24, 2023.\n\"Disenchantment\".\nOn January 15, 2016, it was announced that Groening was in talks with Netflix to develop a new animated series. On July 25, 2017, the series, \"Disenchantment\", was ordered by Netflix. He described the fantasy-oriented series as originating in a sketchbook full of \"fantastic creatures we couldn't do on \"The Simpsons\"\". The cast includes Abbi Jacobson, Eric Andre, and Nat Faxon.\n\"Disenchantment\" ran from August 17, 2018, to September 1, 2023, concluding with its fifth and final part, released on September 1, 2023.\nOther pursuits.\nIn 1993, Groening formed Bongo Comics (named after the character Bongo from \"Life in Hell\") with Steve Vance, Cindy Vance and Bill Morrison, which publishes comic books based on \"The Simpsons\" and \"Futurama\" (including \"Futurama Simpsons Infinitely Secret Crossover Crisis\", a crossover between the two), as well as a few original titles. According to Groening, the goal with Bongo is to \"[try] to bring humor into the fairly grim comic book market.\" He also formed Zongo Comics in 1995, an imprint of Bongo that published comics for more mature readers, which included three issues of Mary Fleener's \"Fleener\" and seven issues of his close friend Gary Panter's \"Jimbo\" comics.\nGroening is known for his eclectic taste in music. His favorite artist is Frank Zappa and The Mothers of Invention and his favorite album is \"Trout Mask Replica\" by Captain Beefheart (which was produced by Zappa). He guest-edited Da Capo Press' \"Best Music Writing 2003\" and curated a US All Tomorrow's Parties music festival in 2003. He illustrated the cover of Frank Zappa's posthumous album \"\" (1996). In May 2010, he curated another edition of All Tomorrow's Parties in Minehead, England. He also plays the drums in the all-author rock and roll band The Rock Bottom Remainders (although he is listed as the cowbell player), whose other members include Dave Barry, Ridley Pearson, Scott Turow, Amy Tan, James McBride, Mitch Albom, Roy Blount Jr., Stephen King, Kathi Kamen Goldmark, Sam Barry and Greg Iles. In July 2013, Groening co-authored \"Hard Listening\" (2013) with the rest of the Rock Bottom Remainders (published by Coliloquy, LLC).\nPersonal life.\nGroening and Deborah Caplan married in 1986 and had two sons together, Homer (who goes by Will) and Abe, both of whom Groening occasionally portrays as rabbits in \"Life in Hell\". The couple divorced in 1999.\nIn 2011, Groening married Agustina Picasso, an Argentine artist, after a four-year relationship, and became stepfather to her daughter Camila Costantini. In May 2013, Picasso gave birth to Nathaniel Philip Picasso Groening, named after writer Nathanael West. She joked that \"his godfather is SpongeBob's creator Stephen Hillenburg\". In 2015, Groening's daughters Luna Margaret and India Mia were born. On June 16, 2018, he became the father of twins for a second time when his wife gave birth to Sol Matthew and Venus Ruth, announced via Instagram. In 2020, their daughter Nirvana was born. In January 2022, they had another child, Satori. In 2024, they had their eighth child together, Shivani, Groening's eleventh.\nGroening's brother-in-law is Craig Bartlett, the creator of \"Hey Arnold!\", \"Dinosaur Train\", and \"Ready Jet Go!\". He is married to Groening's sister, Lisa, but they separated in 2015. Bartlett used to appear in \"Simpsons Illustrated\". Groening is an agnostic.\nPolitics.\nGroening has made a number of campaign contributions, all towards Democratic Party candidates and organizations. He has donated money to the unsuccessful presidential campaigns of Democratic candidates Al Gore in 2000 and John Kerry in 2004, as well as previously donating to Kerry's campaign for Senator from Massachusetts. Groening also collectively donated to the Democratic senatorial campaign committee and to the Senate campaigns of Barbara Boxer (California), Dianne Feinstein (California), Paul Simon (Illinois), Ted Kennedy (Massachusetts), Carl Levin (Michigan), Hillary Clinton (New York), Harvey Gantt (North Carolina), Howard Metzenbaum (Ohio), and Tom Bruggere (Oregon). He also donated to the now-defunct Hollywood Women's Political Committee, which supported and campaigned for the Democratic Party. His first cousin on his mom's side, Laurie Monnes Anderson, was a member of the Oregon State Senate, representing eastern Multnomah County.\nIn an interview with \"Wired\" from 1999, he stated that if he were president, his first act would be \"campaign finance reform\", observing that modern campaign funding is \"a real detriment to democracy\".\nGroening has a great disdain towards former President Richard Nixon, and enjoyed ridiculing him by making him the butt of jokes in \"The Simpsons\" and \"Futurama\".\nInfluences.\nHe has cited cartoonists Robert Crumb, Kim Deitch, Dr. Seuss, Charles M. Schulz, Walt Kelly, George Herriman, Ronald Searle, Ernie Bushmiller, and Lynda Barry as well as Golden Age animators such as Walt Disney, Max Fleischer, Tex Avery, Chuck Jones, and Jay Ward as influences on his animation.\nAwards.\nGroening has been nominated for 41 Emmy Awards and has won thirteen, eleven for \"The Simpsons\" and two for \"Futurama\" in the \"Outstanding Animated Program (for programming one hour or less)\" category. Groening received the 2002 National Cartoonist Society Reuben Award, and had been nominated for the same award in 2000. He received a British Comedy Award for \"outstanding contribution to comedy\" in 2004. In 2007, he was ranked fourth (and highest American by birth) in a list of the \"top 100 living geniuses\", published by British newspaper \"The Daily Telegraph\".\nHe was awarded the Inkpot Award in 1988.\nHe received the 2,459th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on February 14, 2012.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18895", "revid": "40347300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18895", "title": "Metaphysics", "text": "Study of fundamental reality\nMetaphysics is the branch of philosophy that examines the basic structure of reality. It is traditionally seen as the study of mind-independent features of the world, but some theorists view it as an inquiry into the conceptual framework of human understanding. Some philosophers, including Aristotle, designate metaphysics as first philosophy to suggest that it is more fundamental than other forms of philosophical inquiry.\nMetaphysics encompasses a wide range of general and abstract topics. It investigates the nature of existence, the features all entities have in common, and their division into categories of being. An influential division is between particulars and universals. Particulars are individual unique entities, like a specific apple. Universals are general features that different particulars have in common, like the color red. Modal metaphysics examines what it means for something to be possible or necessary. Metaphysicians also explore the concepts of space, time, and change, and their connection to causality and the laws of nature. Other topics include how mind and matter are related, whether everything in the world is predetermined, and whether there is free will.\nMetaphysicians use various methods to conduct their inquiry. They typically rely on rational intuitions and abstract reasoning but also include empirical approaches associated with scientific theories. Due to the abstract nature of its topic, metaphysics has received criticisms questioning the reliability of its methods and the meaningfulness of its theories. Metaphysics is relevant to many fields of inquiry that often implicitly rely on metaphysical concepts and assumptions.\nThe roots of metaphysics lie in antiquity with speculations about the nature and origin of the universe, like those found in the Upanishads in ancient India, Taoism in ancient China, and pre-Socratic philosophy in ancient Greece. During the subsequent medieval period in the West, discussions about the nature of universals were influenced by the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle. The modern period saw the emergence of various comprehensive systems of metaphysics, many of which embraced idealism. In the 20th century, traditional metaphysics in general and idealism in particular faced various criticisms, which prompted new approaches to metaphysical inquiry.\nDefinition.\nMetaphysics is the study of the most elementary features of reality, including existence, objects and their properties, possibility and necessity, space and time, change, causation, and the relation between matter and mind. It is one of the oldest branches of philosophy.\nThe precise nature of metaphysics is disputed and its characterization has changed in the course of history. Some approaches see metaphysics as a unified field and give a wide-sweeping definition by understanding it as the study of \"fundamental questions about the nature of reality\" or as an inquiry into the essences of things. Another approach doubts that the different areas of metaphysics share a set of underlying features and provides instead a fine-grained characterization by listing all the main topics investigated by metaphysicians. Some definitions are descriptive by providing an account of what metaphysicians do while others are normative and prescribe what metaphysicians ought to do.\nTwo historically influential definitions in ancient and medieval philosophy understand metaphysics as the science of the first causes and as the study of being qua being, that is, the topic of what all beings have in common and to what fundamental categories they belong. In the modern period, the scope of metaphysics expanded to include topics such as the distinction between mind and body and free will. Some philosophers follow Aristotle in describing metaphysics as \"first philosophy\", suggesting that it is the most basic inquiry upon which all other branches of philosophy depend in some way.\nMetaphysics is traditionally understood as a study of mind-independent features of reality. Starting with Immanuel Kant's critical philosophy, an alternative conception gained prominence that focuses on conceptual schemes rather than external reality. Kant distinguishes transcendent metaphysics, which aims to describe the objective features of reality beyond sense experience, from the critical perspective on metaphysics, which outlines the aspects and principles underlying all human thought and experience. Philosopher P. F. Strawson further explored the role of conceptual schemes, contrasting descriptive metaphysics, which articulates conceptual schemes commonly used to understand the world, with revisionary metaphysics, which aims to produce better conceptual schemes.\nMetaphysics differs from the individual sciences by studying the most general and abstract aspects of reality. The individual sciences, by contrast, examine more specific and concrete features and restrict themselves to certain classes of entities, such as the focus on physical things in physics, living entities in biology, and cultures in anthropology. It is disputed to what extent this contrast is a strict dichotomy rather than a gradual continuum.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"metaphysics\" has its origin in the ancient Greek words (, meaning 'after', 'above', and 'beyond') and (), as a short form of , meaning 'what comes after the physics'. This is often interpreted to mean that metaphysics discusses topics that, due to their generality and comprehensiveness, lie beyond the realm of physics and its focus on empirical observation. \nAlternatively, metaphysics may have received its name by a historical accident when Aristotle's book on this subject, \"Metaphysics\", was published. Aristotle himself did not use the term \"metaphysics\" but an editor of his works some two centuries later (likely Andronicus of Rhodes) coined it for the title, presumably to indicate that this book should be studied after Aristotle's book \"Physics\": thus, literally 'after physics'. The term entered the English language in the mid 1500s through the Latin word .\nBranches.\nThe nature of metaphysics can also be characterized in relation to its main branches. An influential division from early modern philosophy distinguishes between general and special or specific metaphysics. General metaphysics, also called \"ontology\", takes the widest perspective and studies the most fundamental aspects of being. It investigates the features that all entities share and how entities can be divided into different categories. Categories are the most general kinds, such as substance, property, relation, and fact. Ontologists research which categories there are, how they depend on one another, and how they form a system of categories that provides a comprehensive classification of all entities.\nSpecial metaphysics considers being from more narrow perspectives and is divided into subdisciplines based on the perspective they take. Metaphysical cosmology examines changeable things and investigates how they are connected to form a world as a totality extending through space and time. Rational psychology focuses on metaphysical foundations and problems concerning the mind, such as its relation to matter and the freedom of the will. Natural theology studies the divine and its role as the first cause. The scope of special metaphysics overlaps with other philosophical disciplines, making it unclear whether a topic belongs to it or to areas like philosophy of mind and theology.\nStarting in the second half of the 20th century, applied metaphysics was conceived as the area of applied philosophy examining the implications and uses of metaphysics, both within philosophy and other fields of inquiry. In areas like ethics and philosophy of religion, it addresses topics like the ontological foundations of moral claims and religious doctrines. Beyond philosophy, its applications include the use of ontologies in artificial intelligence, economics, and sociology to classify entities. In psychiatry and medicine, it examines the metaphysical status of diseases.\nMeta-metaphysics is the metatheory of metaphysics and investigates the nature and methods of metaphysics. It examines how metaphysics differs from other philosophical and scientific disciplines and assesses its relevance to them. Even though discussions of these topics have a long history in metaphysics, meta-metaphysics has only recently developed into a systematic field of inquiry.\nTopics.\nExistence and categories of being.\nMetaphysicians often regard existence or being as one of the most basic and general concepts. To exist means to be part of reality, distinguishing real entities from imaginary ones. According to a traditionally influential view, existence is a property of properties: if an entity exists then its properties are instantiated. A different position states that existence is a property of individuals, meaning that it is similar to other properties, such as shape or size. It is controversial whether all entities have this property. According to philosopher Alexius Meinong, there are nonexistent objects, including merely possible objects like Santa Claus and Pegasus. A related question is whether existence is the same for all entities or whether there are different modes or degrees of existence. For instance, Plato held that Platonic forms, which are perfect and immutable ideas, have a higher degree of existence than matter, which can only imperfectly reflect Platonic forms.\nAnother key concern in metaphysics is the division of entities into distinct groups based on underlying features they share. Theories of categories provide a system of the most fundamental kinds or the highest genera of being by establishing a comprehensive inventory of everything. One of the earliest theories of categories was proposed by Aristotle, who outlined a system of 10 categories. He argued that substances (e.g., man and horse), are the most important category since all other categories like quantity (e.g., four), quality (e.g., white), and place (e.g., in Athens) are said of substances and depend on them. Kant understood categories as fundamental principles underlying human understanding and developed a system of 12 categories, divided into the four classes: quantity, quality, relation, and modality. More recent theories of categories were proposed by C. S. Peirce, Edmund Husserl, Samuel Alexander, Roderick Chisholm, and E. J. Lowe. Many philosophers rely on the contrast between concrete and abstract objects. According to a common view, concrete objects, like rocks, trees, and human beings, exist in space and time, undergo changes, and impact each other as cause and effect. They contrast with abstract objects, like numbers and sets, which do not exist in space and time, are immutable, and do not engage in causal relations.\nParticulars.\nParticulars are individual entities and include both concrete objects, like Aristotle, the Eiffel Tower, or a specific apple, and abstract objects, like the number 2 or a specific set in mathematics. They are unique, non-repeatable entities and contrast with universals, like the color red, which can at the same time exist in several places and characterize several particulars. A widely held view is that particulars instantiate universals but are not themselves instantiated by something else, meaning that they exist in themselves while universals exist in something else. Substratum theory, associated with John Locke's philosophy, analyzes each particular as a substratum, also called \"bare particular\", together with various properties. The substratum confers individuality to the particular while the properties express its qualitative features or what it is like. This approach is rejected by bundle theorists. Inspired by David Hume's philosophy, they state that particulars are only bundles of properties without an underlying substratum. Some bundle theorists include in the bundle an individual essence, called \"haecceity\" following scholastic terminology, to ensure that each bundle is unique. Another proposal for concrete particulars is that they are individuated by their space-time location.\nConcrete particulars encountered in everyday life, like rocks, tables, and organisms, are complex entities composed of various parts. For example, a table consists of a tabletop and legs, each of which is itself made up of countless particles. The relation between parts and wholes is studied by mereology. The problem of the many is a philosophical question about the conditions under which several individual things compose a larger whole. For example, a cloud comprises many droplets without a clear boundary, raising the question of which droplets form part of the cloud. According to mereological universalists, every collection of entities forms a whole. This means that what seems to be a single cloud is an overlay of countless clouds, one for each cloud-like collection of water droplets. Mereological moderatists hold that certain conditions must be met for a group of entities to compose a whole, for example, that the entities touch one another. Mereological nihilists reject the idea of wholes altogether, claiming that there are no clouds or tables but only particles that are arranged cloud-wise or table-wise. A related mereological problem is whether there are simple entities that have no parts, as atomists claim, or whether everything can be endlessly subdivided into smaller parts, as continuum theorists contend.\nUniversals.\nUniversals are general entities, encompassing both properties and relations, that express what particulars are like and how they resemble one another. They are repeatable, meaning that they are not limited to a unique existent but can be instantiated by different particulars at the same time. For example, the particulars Nelson Mandela and Mahatma Gandhi instantiate the universal humanity, similar to how a strawberry and a ruby instantiate the universal red.\nA topic discussed since ancient philosophy, the problem of universals consists in the challenge of characterizing the ontological status of universals. Realists argue that universals are real, mind-independent entities that exist in addition to particulars. According to Platonic realists, universals exist independently of particulars, which implies that the universal red would continue to exist even if there were no red things. A more moderate form of realism, inspired by Aristotle, states that universals depend on particulars, meaning that they are only real if they are instantiated. Nominalists reject the idea that universals exist in either form. For them, the world is composed exclusively of particulars. Conceptualists offer an intermediate position, stating that universals exist, but only as concepts in the mind used to order experience by classifying entities.\nNatural and social kinds are often understood as special types of universals. Entities belonging to the same natural kind share certain fundamental features characteristic of the structure of the natural world. In this regard, natural kinds are not an artificially constructed classification but are discovered, usually by the natural sciences, and include kinds like electrons, , and tigers. Scientific realists and anti-realists disagree about whether natural kinds exist. Social kinds, like money and baseball, are studied by social metaphysics and characterized as useful social constructions that, while not purely fictional, do not reflect the fundamental structure of mind-independent reality.\nPossibility and necessity.\nThe concepts of possibility and necessity convey what can or must be the case, expressed in modal statements like \"it is possible to find a cure for cancer\" and \"it is necessary that two plus two equals four\". Modal metaphysics studies metaphysical problems surrounding possibility and necessity, for instance, why some modal statements are true while others are false. Some metaphysicians hold that modality is a fundamental aspect of reality, meaning that besides facts about what is the case, there are additional facts about what could or must be the case. A different view argues that modal truths are not about an independent aspect of reality but can be reduced to non-modal characteristics, for example, to facts about what properties or linguistic descriptions are compatible with each other or to fictional statements.\nBorrowing a term from German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's theodicy, many metaphysicians use the concept of possible worlds to analyze the meaning and ontological ramifications of modal statements. A possible world is a complete and consistent way the totality of things could have been. For example, the dinosaurs were wiped out in the actual world but there are possible worlds in which they are still alive. According to possible world semantics, a statement is possibly true if it is true in at least one possible world, whereas it is necessarily true if it is true in all possible worlds. Modal realists argue that possible worlds exist as concrete entities in the same sense as the actual world, with the main difference being that the actual world is the world we live in while other possible worlds are inhabited by counterparts. This view is controversial and various alternatives have been suggested, for example, that possible worlds only exist as abstract objects or are similar to stories told in works of fiction.\nSpace, time, and change.\nSpace and time are dimensions that entities occupy. Spacetime realists state that space and time are fundamental aspects of reality and exist independently of the human mind. Spacetime idealists, by contrast, hold that space and time are constructs of the human mind, created to organize and make sense of reality. Spacetime absolutism or substantivalism understands spacetime as a distinct object, with some metaphysicians conceptualizing it as a container that holds all other entities within it. Spacetime relationism sees spacetime not as an object but as a network of relations between objects, such as the spatial relation of being next to and the temporal relation of coming before.\nIn the metaphysics of time, an important contrast is between the A-series and the B-series. According to the A-series theory, the flow of time is real, meaning that events are categorized into the past, present, and future. The present continually moves forward in time and events that are in the present now will eventually change their status and lie in the past. From the perspective of the B-series theory, time is static, and events are ordered by the temporal relations earlier-than and later-than without any essential difference between past, present, and future. Eternalism holds that past, present, and future are equally real, whereas presentism asserts that only entities in the present exist.\nMaterial objects persist through time and change in the process, like a tree that grows or loses leaves. The main ways of conceptualizing persistence through time are endurantism and perdurantism. According to endurantism, material objects are three-dimensional entities that are wholly present at each moment. As they change, they gain or lose properties but otherwise remain the same. Perdurantists see material objects as four-dimensional entities that extend through time and are made up of different temporal parts. At each moment, only one part of the object is present, not the object as a whole. Change means that an earlier part is qualitatively different from a later part. For example, when a banana ripens, there is an unripe part followed by a ripe part.\nCausality.\nCausality is the relation between cause and effect whereby one entity produces or alters another entity. For instance, if a person bumps a glass and spills its contents then the bump is the cause and the spill is the effect. Besides the single-case causation between particulars in this example, there is also general-case causation expressed in statements such as \"smoking causes cancer\". The term agent causation is used when people and their actions cause something. Causation is usually interpreted deterministically, meaning that a cause always brings about its effect. However, some philosophers such as G. E. M. Anscombe have provided counterexamples to this idea. Such counterexamples have inspired the development of probabilistic theories, which claim that the cause merely increases the probability that the effect occurs. This view can explain that smoking causes cancer even though this does not happen in every single case.\nThe regularity theory of causation, inspired by David Hume's philosophy, states that causation is nothing but a constant conjunction in which the mind apprehends that one phenomenon, like putting one's hand in a fire, is always followed by another phenomenon, like a feeling of pain. According to nomic regularity theories, regularities manifest as laws of nature studied by science. Counterfactual theories focus not on regularities but on how effects depend on their causes. They state that effects owe their existence to the cause and would not occur without them. According to primitivism, causation is a basic concept that cannot be analyzed in terms of non-causal concepts, such as regularities or dependence relations. One form of primitivism identifies causal powers inherent in entities as the underlying mechanism. Eliminativists reject the above theories by holding that there is no causation.\nMind and free will.\nMind encompasses phenomena like thinking, perceiving, feeling, and desiring as well as the underlying faculties responsible for these phenomena. The mind\u2013body problem is the challenge of clarifying the relation between physical and mental phenomena. According to Cartesian dualism, minds and bodies are distinct substances. They causally interact with each other in various ways but can, at least in principle, exist on their own. This view is rejected by monists, who argue that reality is made up of only one kind. According to metaphysical idealism, everything is mental or dependent on the mind, including physical objects, which may be understood as ideas or perceptions of conscious minds. Materialists, by contrast, state that all reality is at its core material. Some deny that mind exists but the more common approach is to explain mind in terms of certain aspects of matter, such as brain states, behavioral dispositions, or functional roles. Neutral monists argue that reality is fundamentally neither material nor mental and suggest that matter and mind are both derivative phenomena. A key aspect of the mind\u2013body problem is the hard problem of consciousness or how to explain that physical systems like brains can produce phenomenal consciousness.\nThe status of free will as the ability of a person to choose their actions is a central aspect of the mind\u2013body problem. Metaphysicians are interested in the relation between free will and causal determinism\u2014the view that everything in the universe, including human behavior, is determined by preceding events and laws of nature. It is controversial whether causal determinism is true, and, if so, whether this would imply that there is no free will. According to incompatibilism, free will cannot exist in a deterministic world since there is no true choice or control if everything is determined. Hard determinists infer from this that there is no free will, whereas libertarians conclude that determinism must be false. Compatibilists offer a third perspective, arguing that determinism and free will do not exclude each other, for instance, because a person can still act in tune with their motivation and choices even if they are determined by other forces. Free will plays a key role in ethics regarding the moral responsibility people have for what they do.\nOthers.\nIdentity is a relation that every entity has to itself as a form of sameness. It refers to numerical identity when the same entity is involved, as in the statement \"the morning star is the evening star\" (both are the planet Venus). In a slightly different sense, it encompasses qualitative identity, also called \"exact similarity\" and \"indiscernibility\", which occurs when two distinct entities are exactly alike, such as perfect identical twins. The principle of the indiscernibility of identicals is widely accepted and holds that numerically identical entities exactly resemble one another. The converse principle, known as the identity of indiscernibles or Leibniz's Law, is more controversial and states that two entities are numerically identical if they exactly resemble one another. Another distinction is between synchronic and diachronic identity. Synchronic identity relates an entity to itself at the same time, whereas diachronic identity is about the same entity at different times, as in statements like \"the table I bought last year is the same as the table in my dining room now\". Personal identity is a related topic in metaphysics that uses the term \"identity\" in a slightly different sense and concerns questions like what personhood is or what makes someone a person.\nVarious contemporary metaphysicians rely on the concepts of truth, truth-bearer, and truthmaker to conduct their inquiry. Truth is a property of being in accord with reality. Truth-bearers are entities that can be true or false, such as linguistic statements and mental representations. A truthmaker of a statement is the entity whose existence makes the statement true. For example, the fact that a tomato exists and that it is red acts as a truthmaker for the statement \"a tomato is red\". Based on this observation, it is possible to pursue metaphysical research by asking what the truthmakers of statements are, with different areas of metaphysics being dedicated to different types of statements. According to this view, modal metaphysics asks what makes statements about what is possible and necessary true while the metaphysics of time is interested in the truthmakers of temporal statements about the past, present, and future. A closely related topic concerns the nature of truth. Theories of truth aim to determine this nature and include correspondence, coherence, pragmatic, semantic, and deflationary theories.\nMethodology.\nMetaphysicians employ a variety of methods to develop metaphysical theories and formulate arguments for and against them. Traditionally, \"a priori\" methods have been the dominant approach. They rely on rational intuition and abstract reasoning from general principles rather than sensory experience. \"A posteriori\" approaches, by contrast, ground metaphysical theories in empirical observations and scientific theories. Some metaphysicians incorporate perspectives from fields such as physics, psychology, linguistics, and history into their inquiry. The two approaches are not mutually exclusive: it is possible to combine elements from both. The method a metaphysician chooses often depends on their understanding of the nature of metaphysics, for example, whether they see it as an inquiry into the mind-independent structure of reality, as metaphysical realists claim, or the principles underlying thought and experience, as some metaphysical anti-realists contend.\n\"A priori\" approaches often rely on intuitions\u2014non-inferential impressions about the correctness of specific claims or general principles. For example, arguments for the A-theory of time, which states that time flows from the past through the present and into the future, often rely on pre-theoretical intuitions associated with the sense of the passage of time. Some approaches use intuitions to establish a small set of self-evident fundamental principles, known as axioms, and employ deductive reasoning to build complex metaphysical systems by drawing conclusions from these axioms. Intuition-based approaches can be combined with thought experiments, which help evoke and clarify intuitions by linking them to imagined situations. They use counterfactual thinking to assess the possible consequences of these situations. For example, to explore the relation between matter and consciousness, some theorists compare humans to philosophical zombies\u2014hypothetical creatures identical to humans but without conscious experience. A related method relies on commonly accepted beliefs instead of intuitions to formulate arguments and theories. The common-sense approach is often used to criticize metaphysical theories that deviate significantly from how the average person thinks about an issue. For example, common-sense philosophers have argued that mereological nihilism is false since it implies that commonly accepted things, like tables, do not exist.\nConceptual analysis, a method particularly prominent in analytic philosophy, aims to decompose metaphysical concepts into component parts to clarify their meaning and identify essential relations. In phenomenology, the method of eidetic variation is used to investigate essential structures underlying phenomena. This method involves imagining an object and varying its features to determine which ones are essential and cannot be changed. The transcendental method is a further approach and examines the metaphysical structure of reality by observing what entities there are and studying the conditions of possibility without which these entities could not exist.\nSome approaches give less importance to \"a priori\" reasoning and view metaphysics as a practice continuous with the empirical sciences that generalizes their insights while making their underlying assumptions explicit. This approach is known as \"naturalized metaphysics\" and is closely associated with the work of Willard Van Orman Quine. He relies on the idea that true sentences from the sciences and other fields have ontological commitments, that is, they imply that certain entities exist. For example, if the sentence \"some electrons are bonded to protons\" is true then it can be used to justify that electrons and protons exist. Quine used this insight to argue that one can learn about metaphysics by closely analyzing scientific claims to understand what kind of metaphysical picture of the world they presuppose.\nIn addition to methods of conducting metaphysical inquiry, there are various methodological principles used to decide between competing theories by comparing their theoretical virtues. Ockham's Razor is a well-known principle that gives preference to simple theories, in particular, those that assume that few entities exist. Other principles consider explanatory power, theoretical usefulness, and proximity to established beliefs.\nCriticism.\nDespite its status as one of the main branches of philosophy, metaphysics has received numerous criticisms questioning its legitimacy as a field of inquiry. One criticism argues that metaphysical inquiry is impossible because humans lack the cognitive capacities needed to access the ultimate nature of reality. This line of thought leads to skepticism about the possibility of metaphysical knowledge. Empiricists often follow this idea, like Hume, who asserts that there is no good source of metaphysical knowledge since metaphysics lies outside the field of empirical knowledge and relies on dubious intuitions about the realm beyond sensory experience. Arguing that the mind actively structures experience, Kant criticizes traditional metaphysics for its attempt to gain insight into the mind-independent nature of reality. He asserts that knowledge is limited to the realm of possible experience, meaning that humans are not able to decide questions like whether the world has a beginning in time or is infinite. A related argument favoring the unreliability of metaphysical theorizing points to the deep and lasting disagreements about metaphysical issues, suggesting a lack of overall progress.\nAnother criticism holds that the problem lies not with human cognitive abilities but with metaphysical statements themselves, which some claim are neither true nor false but meaningless. According to logical positivists, for instance, the meaning of a statement is given by the procedure used to verify it, usually through the observations that would confirm it. Based on this controversial assumption, they argue that metaphysical statements are meaningless since they make no testable predictions about experience.\nA slightly weaker position allows metaphysical statements to have meaning while holding that metaphysical disagreements are merely verbal disputes about different ways to describe the world. According to this view, the disagreement in the metaphysics of composition about whether there are tables or only particles arranged table-wise is a trivial debate about linguistic preferences without any substantive consequences for the nature of reality. The position that metaphysical disputes have no meaning or no significant point is called \"metaphysical\" or \"ontological deflationism\". This view is opposed by so-called \"serious metaphysicians\", who contend that metaphysical disputes are about substantial features of the underlying structure of reality. A closely related debate between ontological realists and anti-realists concerns the question of whether there are any objective facts that determine which metaphysical theories are true. A different criticism, formulated by pragmatists, sees the fault of metaphysics not in its cognitive ambitions or the meaninglessness of its statements, but in its practical irrelevance and lack of usefulness.\nMartin Heidegger criticized traditional metaphysics, saying that it fails to distinguish between individual entities and being as their ontological ground. His attempt to reveal the underlying assumptions and limitations in the history of metaphysics to \"overcome metaphysics\" influenced Jacques Derrida's method of deconstruction. Derrida employed this approach to criticize metaphysical texts for relying on opposing terms, like presence and absence, which he thought were inherently unstable and contradictory.\nThere is no consensus about the validity of these criticisms and whether they affect metaphysics as a whole or only certain issues or approaches in it. For example, it could be the case that certain metaphysical disputes are merely verbal while others are substantive.\nRelation to other disciplines.\nMetaphysics is related to many fields of inquiry by investigating their basic concepts and relation to the fundamental structure of reality. For example, the natural sciences rely on concepts such as law of nature, causation, necessity, and spacetime to formulate their theories and predict or explain the outcomes of experiments. While scientists primarily focus on applying these concepts to specific situations, metaphysics examines their general nature and how they depend on each other. For instance, physicists formulate laws of nature, like laws of gravitation and thermodynamics, to describe how physical systems behave under various conditions. Metaphysicians, by contrast, examine what all laws of nature have in common, asking whether they merely describe contingent regularities or express necessary relations. New scientific discoveries have also influenced existing metaphysical theories and inspired new ones. Einstein's theory of relativity, for instance, prompted various metaphysicians to conceive space and time as a unified dimension rather than as independent dimensions. Empirically focused metaphysicians often rely on scientific theories to ground their theories about the nature of reality in empirical observations.\nSimilar issues arise in the social sciences where metaphysicians investigate their basic concepts and analyze their metaphysical implications. This includes questions like whether social facts emerge from non-social facts, whether social groups and institutions have mind-independent existence, and how they persist through time. Metaphysical assumptions and topics in psychology and psychiatry include the questions about the relation between body and mind, whether the nature of the human mind is historically fixed, and what the metaphysical status of diseases is.\nMetaphysics is similar to both physical cosmology and theology in its exploration of the first causes and the universe as a whole. Key differences are that metaphysics relies on rational inquiry while physical cosmology gives more weight to empirical observations and theology incorporates divine revelation and other faith-based doctrines. Historically, cosmology and theology were considered subfields of metaphysics.\nComputer scientists rely on metaphysics in the form of ontology to represent and classify objects. They develop conceptual frameworks, called \"ontologies\", for limited domains, such as a database with categories like \"person\", \"company\", \"address\", and \"name\" to represent information about clients and employees. Ontologies provide standards for encoding and storing information in a structured way, allowing computational processes to use the information for various purposes. Upper ontologies, such as Suggested Upper Merged Ontology and Basic Formal Ontology, define concepts at a more abstract level, making it possible to integrate information belonging to different domains.\nLogic as the study of correct reasoning is often used by metaphysicians to engage in their inquiry and express insights through precise logical formulas. Another relation between the two fields concerns the metaphysical assumptions associated with logical systems. Many logical systems like first-order logic rely on existential quantifiers to express existential statements. For instance, in the logical formula formula_1 the existential quantifier formula_2 is applied to the predicate formula_3 to express that there are horses. Following Quine, various metaphysicians assume that existential quantifiers carry ontological commitments, meaning that existential statements imply that the entities over which one quantifies are part of reality.\nHistory.\nMetaphysics originated in the ancient period from speculations about the nature and origin of the cosmos. In ancient India, starting in the 7th century BCE, the Upanishads were written as religious and philosophical texts that examine how ultimate reality constitutes the ground of all being. They further explore the nature of the self and how it can reach liberation by understanding ultimate reality. This period also saw the emergence of Buddhism in the 6th century BCE, which denies the existence of an independent self and understands the world as a cyclic process. At about the same time in ancient China, the school of Taoism was formed and explored the natural order of the universe, known as Tao, and how it is characterized by the interplay of yin and yang as two correlated forces.\nIn ancient Greece, metaphysics emerged in the 6th century BCE with the pre-Socratic philosophers, who gave rational explanations of the cosmos as a whole by examining the first principles from which everything arises. Building on their work, Plato (427\u2013347 BCE) formulated his theory of forms, which states that eternal forms or ideas possess the highest kind of reality while the material world is only an imperfect reflection of them. Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE) accepted Plato's idea that there are universal forms but held that they cannot exist on their own but depend on matter. He also proposed a system of categories and developed a comprehensive framework of the natural world through his theory of the four causes. Starting in the 4th century BCE, Hellenistic philosophy explored the rational order underlying the cosmos and the laws governing it. Neoplatonism emerged towards the end of the ancient period in the 3rd century CE and introduced the idea of \"the One\" as the transcendent and ineffable source of all creation.\nMeanwhile, in Indian Buddhism, the Madhyamaka school developed the idea that all phenomena are inherently empty without a permanent essence. The consciousness-only doctrine of the Yog\u0101c\u0101ra school stated that experienced objects are mere transformations of consciousness and do not reflect external reality. The Hindu school of Samkhya philosophy introduced a metaphysical dualism with pure consciousness and matter as its fundamental categories. In China, the school of Xuanxue explored metaphysical problems such as the contrast between being and non-being.\nMedieval Western philosophy was profoundly shaped by ancient Greek thought as philosophers integrated these ideas with Christian philosophical teachings. Boethius (477\u2013524 CE) sought to reconcile Plato's and Aristotle's theories of universals, proposing that universals can exist both in matter and mind. His theory inspired the development of nominalism and conceptualism, as in the thought of Peter Abelard (1079\u20131142 CE). Thomas Aquinas (1224\u20131274 CE) understood metaphysics as the discipline investigating different meanings of \"being\", such as the contrast between substance and accident, and principles applying to all beings, such as the principle of identity. William of Ockham (1285\u20131347 CE) developed a methodological principle, known as Ockham's razor, to choose between competing metaphysical theories. Arabic\u2013Persian philosophy flourished from the early 9th century CE to the late 12th century CE, integrating ancient Greek philosophies to interpret and clarify the teachings of the Quran. Avicenna (980\u20131037 CE) developed a comprehensive philosophical system that examined the contrast between existence and essence and distinguished between contingent and necessary existence. Medieval India saw the emergence of the monist school of Advaita Vedanta in the 8th century CE, which holds that everything is one and that the idea of many entities existing independently is an illusion. In China, Neo-Confucianism arose in the 9th century CE and explored the concept of li as the rational principle that is the ground of being and reflects the order of the universe.\nIn the early modern period and following renewed interest in Platonism during the Renaissance, Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650) developed a substance dualism according to which body and mind exist as independent entities that causally interact. This idea was rejected by Baruch Spinoza (1632\u20131677), who formulated a monist philosophy suggesting that there is only one substance with both physical and mental attributes that develop side-by-side without interacting. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646\u20131716) introduced the concept of possible worlds and articulated a metaphysical system known as monadology, which views the universe as a collection of simple substances synchronized without causal interaction. Christian Wolff (1679\u20131754), conceptualized the scope of metaphysics by distinguishing between general and special metaphysics. According to the idealism of George Berkeley (1685\u20131753), everything is mental, including material objects, which are ideas perceived by the mind. David Hume (1711\u20131776) made various contributions to metaphysics, including the regularity theory of causation and the idea that there are no necessary connections between distinct entities. Inspired by the empiricism of Francis Bacon (1561\u20131626) and John Locke (1632\u20131704), Hume criticized metaphysical theories that seek ultimate principles inaccessible to sensory experience. This critical outlook was embraced by Immanuel Kant (1724\u20131804), who tried to reconceptualize metaphysics as an inquiry into the basic principles and categories of thought and understanding rather than seeing it as an attempt to comprehend mind-independent reality.\nMany developments in the later modern period were shaped by Kant's philosophy. German idealists adopted his idealistic outlook in their attempt to find a unifying principle as the foundation of all reality. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel's (1770\u20131831) idealistic contention is that reality is conceptual all the way down, and being itself is rational. He inspired the British idealism of Francis Herbert Bradley (1846\u20131924), who interpreted Hegel's concept of absolute spirit as the all-inclusive totality of being. Arthur Schopenhauer (1788\u20131860) was a strong critic of German idealism and articulated a different metaphysical vision, positing a blind and irrational will as the underlying principle of reality. Pragmatists like C. S. Peirce (1839\u20131914) and John Dewey (1859\u20131952) conceived metaphysics as an observational science of the most general features of reality and experience.\nAt the turn of the 20th century in analytic philosophy, philosophers such as Bertrand Russell (1872\u20131970) and G. E. Moore (1873\u20131958) led a \"revolt against idealism\", arguing for the existence of a mind-independent world aligned with common sense and empirical science. Logical atomists, like Russell and the early Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889\u20131951), conceived the world as a multitude of atomic facts, which later inspired metaphysicians such as D. M. Armstrong (1926\u20132014). Alfred North Whitehead (1861\u20131947) developed process metaphysics as an attempt to provide a holistic description of both the objective and the subjective realms. \nRudolf Carnap (1891\u20131970) and other logical positivists formulated a wide-ranging criticism of metaphysical statements, arguing that they are meaningless because there is no way to verify them. Other criticisms of traditional metaphysics identified misunderstandings of ordinary language as the source of many traditional metaphysical problems or challenged complex metaphysical deductions by appealing to common sense. \nThe decline of logical positivism led to a revival of metaphysical theorizing. Willard Van Orman Quine (1908\u20132000) tried to naturalize metaphysics by connecting it to the empirical sciences. His student David Lewis (1941\u20132001) employed the concept of possible worlds to formulate his modal realism. Saul Kripke (1940\u20132022) helped revive discussions of identity and essentialism, distinguishing necessity as a metaphysical notion from the epistemic notion of \"a priori\".\nIn continental philosophy, Edmund Husserl (1859\u20131938) engaged in ontology through a phenomenological description of experience, while his student Martin Heidegger (1889\u20131976) developed fundamental ontology to clarify the meaning of being. Heidegger's philosophy inspired Jacques Derrida's (1930\u20132004) criticism of metaphysics. Gilles Deleuze's (1925\u20131995) approach to metaphysics challenged traditionally influential concepts like substance, essence, and identity by reconceptualizing the field through alternative notions such as multiplicity, event, and difference.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18896", "revid": "35751661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18896", "title": "Human spaceflight", "text": "Spaceflight with a crew or passengers\nHuman spaceflight (also referred to as crewed spaceflight, or more historically manned spaceflight) is spaceflight with a crew or passengers aboard a spacecraft, often with the spacecraft being operated directly by the onboard human crew. Spacecraft can also be remotely operated from ground stations on Earth, or autonomously, without any direct human involvement. People trained for spaceflight are called astronauts (American or other), \"cosmonauts\" (Russian), or \"taikonauts\" (Chinese); and non-professionals are referred to as spaceflight participants or \"spacefarers\".\nThe first human in space was Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, who launched as part of the Soviet Union's Vostok program on 12 April 1961 at the beginning of the Space Race. On 5 May 1961, Alan Shepard became the first American in space, as part of Project Mercury. Humans traveled to the Moon nine times between 1968 and 1972 as part of the United States' Apollo program, and have had a continuous presence in space for on the International Space Station (ISS). On 15 October 2003, the first Chinese taikonaut, Yang Liwei, went to space as part of Shenzhou 5, the first Chinese human spaceflight. As of March 2025, humans have not traveled beyond low Earth orbit since the Apollo 17 lunar mission in December 1972.\nCurrently, the United States, Russia, and China are the only countries with public or commercial human spaceflight-capable programs. Non-governmental spaceflight companies have been working to develop human space programs of their own, e.g. for space tourism or commercial in-space research. The first private human spaceflight launch was a suborbital flight on SpaceShipOne on June 21, 2004. The first commercial orbital crew launch was by SpaceX in May 2020, transporting NASA astronauts to the ISS under United States government contract.\nHistory.\nCold War era.\nHuman spaceflight capability was first developed during the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union (USSR). These nations developed intercontinental ballistic missiles for the delivery of nuclear weapons, producing rockets large enough to be adapted to carry the first artificial satellites into low Earth orbit.\nAfter the first satellites were launched in 1957 and 1958 by the Soviet Union, the US began work on Project Mercury, with the aim of launching men into orbit. The USSR was secretly pursuing the Vostok program to accomplish the same thing, and launched the first human into space, the cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin. On 12 April 1961, Gagarin was launched aboard Vostok 1 on a Vostok 3KA rocket and completed a single orbit. On 5 May 1961, the US launched its first astronaut, Alan Shepard, on a suborbital flight aboard \"Freedom 7\" on a Mercury-Redstone rocket. Unlike Gagarin, Shepard manually controlled his spacecraft's attitude. On 20 February 1962, John Glenn became the first American in orbit, aboard \"Friendship 7\" on a Mercury-Atlas rocket. The USSR launched five more cosmonauts in Vostok capsules, including the first woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova, aboard Vostok 6 on 16 June 1963. Through 1963, the US launched a total of two astronauts in suborbital flights and four into orbit. The US also made two North American X-15 flights (90 and 91, piloted by Joseph A. Walker), that exceeded the K\u00e1rm\u00e1n line, the altitude used by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration A\u00e9ronautique Internationale (FAI) to denote the edge of space.\nIn 1961, US President John F. Kennedy raised the stakes of the Space Race by setting the goal of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth by the end of the 1960s. That same year, the US began the Apollo program of launching three-man capsules atop the Saturn family of launch vehicles. In 1962, the US began Project Gemini, which flew 10 missions with two-man crews launched by Titan II rockets in 1965 and 1966. Gemini's objective was to support Apollo by developing American orbital spaceflight experience and techniques to be used during the Moon mission.\nMeanwhile, the USSR remained silent about their intentions to send humans to the Moon and proceeded to stretch the limits of their single-pilot Vostok capsule by adapting it to a two or three-person Voskhod capsule to compete with Gemini. They were able to launch two orbital flights in 1964 and 1965 and achieved the first spacewalk, performed by Alexei Leonov on Voskhod 2, on 8 March 1965. However, the Voskhod did not have Gemini's capability to maneuver in orbit, and the program was terminated. The US Gemini flights did not achieve the first spacewalk, but overcame the early Soviet lead by performing several spacewalks, solving the problem of astronaut fatigue caused by compensating for the lack of gravity, demonstrating the ability of humans to endure two weeks in space, and performing the first space rendezvous and docking of spacecraft.\nThe US succeeded in developing the Saturn V rocket necessary to send the Apollo spacecraft to the Moon, and sent Frank Borman, James Lovell, and William Anders into 10 orbits around the Moon in Apollo 8 in December 1968. In 1969, Apollo 11 accomplished Kennedy's goal by landing Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the Moon on 21 July and returning them safely on 24 July, along with Command Module pilot Michael Collins. Through 1972, a total of six Apollo missions landed 12 men to walk on the Moon, half of which drove electric powered vehicles on the surface. The crew of Apollo 13\u2014Jim Lovell, Jack Swigert, and Fred Haise\u2014survived an in-flight spacecraft failure, they flew by the Moon without landing, and returned safely to Earth.\nDuring this time, the USSR secretly pursued crewed lunar orbiting and landing programs. They successfully developed the three-person Soyuz spacecraft for use in the lunar programs, but failed to develop the N1 rocket necessary for a human landing, and discontinued their lunar programs in 1974. Upon losing the Moon race they concentrated on the development of space stations, using the Soyuz as a ferry to take cosmonauts to and from the stations. They started with a series of Salyut sortie stations from 1971 to 1986.\nPost-Apollo era.\nIn 1969, Nixon appointed his vice president, Spiro Agnew, to head a Space Task Group to recommend follow-on human spaceflight programs after Apollo. The group proposed an ambitious Space Transportation System based on a reusable Space Shuttle, which consisted of a winged, internally fueled orbiter stage burning liquid hydrogen, launched with a similar, but larger kerosene-fueled booster stage, each equipped with airbreathing jet engines for powered return to a runway at the Kennedy Space Center launch site. Other components of the system included a permanent, modular space station; reusable space tug; and nuclear interplanetary ferry, leading to a human expedition to Mars as early as 1986 or as late as 2000, depending on the level of funding allocated. However, Nixon knew the American political climate would not support congressional funding for such an ambition, and killed proposals for all but the Shuttle, possibly to be followed by the space station. Plans for the Shuttle were scaled back to reduce development risk, cost, and time, replacing the piloted fly-back booster with two reusable solid rocket boosters, and the smaller orbiter would use an expendable external propellant tank to feed its hydrogen-fueled main engines. The orbiter would have to make unpowered landings.\nIn 1973, the US launched the Skylab sortie space station and inhabited it for 171 days with three crews ferried aboard an Apollo spacecraft. During that time, President Richard Nixon and Soviet general secretary Leonid Brezhnev were negotiating an easing of Cold War tensions known as d\u00e9tente. During the d\u00e9tente, they negotiated the Apollo\u2013Soyuz program, in which an Apollo spacecraft carrying a special docking adapter module would rendezvous and dock with Soyuz 19 in 1975. The American and Soviet crews shook hands in space, but the purpose of the flight was purely symbolic.\nThe two nations continued to compete rather than cooperate in space, as the US turned to developing the Space Shuttle and planning the space station, which was dubbed \"Freedom\". The USSR launched three Almaz military sortie stations from 1973 to 1977, disguised as Salyuts. They followed Salyut with the development of \"Mir\", the first modular, semi-permanent space station, the construction of which took place from 1986 to 1996. \"Mir\" orbited at an altitude of , at an orbital inclination of 51.6\u00b0. It was occupied for 4,592 days and made a controlled reentry in 2001.\nThe Space Shuttle started flying in 1981, but the US Congress failed to approve sufficient funds to make \"Space Station Freedom\" a reality. A fleet of four shuttles was built: \"Columbia\", \"Challenger\", \"Discovery\", and \"Atlantis\". A fifth shuttle, \"Endeavour\", was built to replace \"Challenger\", which was destroyed in an accident during launch that killed 7 astronauts on 28 January 1986. From 1983 to 1998, twenty-two Shuttle flights carried components for a European Space Agency sortie space station called Spacelab in the Shuttle payload bay.\nThe USSR copied the US's reusable Space Shuttle orbiter, which they called \"Buran\"-class orbiter or simply \"Buran\", which was designed to be launched into orbit by the expendable Energia rocket, and was capable of robotic orbital flight and landing. Unlike the Space Shuttle, \"Buran\" had no main rocket engines, but like the Space Shuttle orbiter, it used smaller rocket engines to perform its final orbital insertion. A single uncrewed orbital test flight took place in November 1988. A second test flight was planned by 1993, but the program was canceled due to lack of funding and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. Two more orbiters were never completed, and the one that performed the uncrewed flight was destroyed in a hangar roof collapse in May 2002.\nUS / Russian cooperation.\nThe dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 brought an end to the Cold War and opened the door to true cooperation between the US and Russia. The Soviet Soyuz and Mir programs were taken over by the Russian Federal Space Agency, which became known as the Roscosmos State Corporation. The Shuttle-Mir Program included American Space Shuttles visiting the \"Mir\" space station, Russian cosmonauts flying on the Shuttle, and an American astronaut flying aboard a Soyuz spacecraft for long-duration expeditions aboard \"Mir\".\nIn 1993, President Bill Clinton secured Russia's cooperation in converting the planned Space Station \"Freedom\" into the International Space Station (ISS). Construction of the station began in 1998. The station orbits at an altitude of and an orbital inclination of 51.65\u00b0. Several of the Space Shuttle's 135 orbital flights were to help assemble, supply, and crew the ISS. Russia has built half of the International Space Station and has continued its cooperation with the US.\nChina.\nChina was the third nation in the world, after the USSR and US, to send humans into space. During the Space Race between the two superpowers, which culminated with Apollo 11 landing humans on the Moon, Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai decided on 14 July 1967 that China should not be left behind, and initiated their own crewed space program: the top-secret Project 714, which aimed to put two people into space by 1973 with the Shuguang spacecraft. Nineteen PLAAF pilots were selected for this goal in March 1971. The Shuguang-1 spacecraft, to be launched with the CZ-2A rocket, was designed to carry a crew of two. The program was officially canceled on 13 May 1972 for economic reasons.\nIn 1992, under China Manned Space Program (CMS), also known as \"Project 921\", authorization and funding was given for the first phase of a third, successful attempt at crewed spaceflight. To achieve independent human spaceflight capability, China developed the Shenzhou spacecraft and Long March 2F rocket dedicated to human spaceflight in the next few years, along with critical infrastructures like a new launch site and flight control center being built. The first uncrewed spacecraft, \"Shenzhou 1\", was launched on 20 November 1999 and recovered the next day, marking the first step of the realization of China's human spaceflight capability. Three more uncrewed missions were conducted in the next few years in order to verify the key technologies. On 15 October 2003 \"Shenzhou 5\", China's first crewed spaceflight mission, put \"Yang Liwei\" in orbit for 21 hours and returned safely back to Inner Mongolia, making China the third nation to launch a human into orbit independently.\nThe goal of the second phase of CMS was to make technology breakthroughs in extravehicular activities (EVA, or spacewalk),space rendezvous, and docking to support short-term human activities in space. On 25 September 2008 during the flight of \"Shenzhou 7\", \"Zhai Zhigang\" and \"Liu Boming\" completed China's first EVA. In 2011, China launched the Tiangong 1 target spacecraft and \"Shenzhou 8\" uncrewed spacecraft. The two spacecraft completed China's first automatic rendezvous and docking on 3 November 2011. About 9 months later, \"Tiangong 1\" completed the first manual rendezvous and docking with \"Shenzhou 9\", which carried China's first female astronaut \"Liu Yang\".\nIn September 2016, \"Tiangong 2\" was launched into orbit. It was a space laboratory with more advanced functions and equipment than \"Tiangong 1\". A month later, \"Shenzhou 11\" was launched and docked with \"Tiangong 2\". Two astronauts entered \"Tiangong 2\" and were stationed for about 30 days, verifying the viability of astronauts' medium-term stay in space. In April 2017, China's first cargo spacecraft, \"Tianzhou 1\" docked with \"Tiangong 2\" and completed multiple in-orbit propellant refueling tests, which marked the successful completion of the second phase of CMS.\nThe third phase of CMS began in 2020. The goal of this phase is to build China's own space station, \"Tiangong\". The first module of \"Tiangong\", the Tianhe core module, was launched into orbit by China's most powerful rocket Long March 5B on 29 April 2021. It was later visited by multiple cargo and crewed spacecraft and demonstrated China's capability of sustaining Chinese astronauts' long-term stay in space.\nAccording to CMS announcement, all missions of Tiangong Space Station are scheduled to be carried out by the end of 2022. Once the construction is completed, \"Tiangong\" will enter the application and development phase, which is poised to last for no less than 10 years.\nAbandoned programs of other nations.\nThe European Space Agency began development of the Hermes shuttle spaceplane in 1987, to be launched on the Ariane 5 expendable launch vehicle. It was intended to dock with the European Columbus space station. The projects were canceled in 1992 when it became clear that neither cost nor performance goals could be achieved. No Hermes shuttles were ever built. The Columbus space station was reconfigured as the European module of the same name on the International Space Station.\nJapan (NASDA) began the development of the HOPE-X experimental shuttle spaceplane in the 1980s, to be launched on its H-IIA expendable launch vehicle. A string of failures in 1998 led to funding reductions, and the project's cancellation in 2003 in favor of participation in the International Space Station program through the \"Kib\u014d\" Japanese Experiment Module and H-II Transfer Vehicle cargo spacecraft. As an alternative to HOPE-X, NASDA in 2001 proposed the Fuji crew capsule for independent or ISS flights, but the project did not proceed to the contracting stage.\nFrom 1993 to 1997, the Japanese Rocket Society, Kawasaki Heavy Industries, and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries worked on the proposed Kankoh-maru vertical-takeoff-and-landing single-stage-to-orbit reusable launch system. In 2005, this system was proposed for space tourism.\nAccording to a press release from the Iraqi News Agency dated 5 December 1989, there was only one test of the Al-Abid space launcher, which Iraq intended to use to develop its own crewed space facilities by the end of the century. These plans were put to an end by the Gulf War of 1991 and the economic hardships that followed.\nUnited States \"Shuttle gap\".\nUnder the George W. Bush administration, the Constellation program included plans for retiring the Space Shuttle program and replacing it with the capability for spaceflight beyond low Earth orbit. In the 2011 United States federal budget, the Obama administration canceled Constellation for being over budget and behind schedule, while not innovating and investing in critical new technologies. As part of the Artemis program, NASA is developing the Orion spacecraft to be launched by the Space Launch System. Under the Commercial Crew Development plan, NASA relies on transportation services provided by the private sector to reach low Earth orbit, such as SpaceX Dragon 2, the Boeing Starliner or Sierra Nevada Corporation's Dream Chaser. The period between the retirement of the Space Shuttle in 2011 and the first launch into space of SpaceShipTwo Flight VP-03 on 13 December 2018 is similar to the gap between the end of Apollo in 1975 and the first Space Shuttle flight in 1981, and is referred to by a presidential Blue Ribbon Committee as the U.S. human spaceflight gap.\nCommercial private spaceflight.\nSince the early 2000s, a variety of private spaceflight ventures have been undertaken. As of November\u00a02024,[ [update]] SpaceX and Boeing have launched humans to orbit, while Blue Origin has launched 8 crewed flights, six of which crossed the K\u00e1rm\u00e1n line. Virgin Galactic has launched crew to a height above on a suborbital trajectory. Several other companies, including Sierra Nevada and Copenhagen Suborbitals, have developed crewed spacecraft. SpaceX, Boeing, Blue Origin, and Virgin Galactic plan to fly commercial passengers in the emerging space tourism market.\nSpaceX has developed Crew Dragon flying on Falcon 9. It first launched astronauts to orbit and to the ISS in May 2020 as part of the Demo-2 mission. Developed as part of NASA's Commercial Crew Development program, the capsule is also available for flights with other customers. A first tourist mission, Inspiration4, launched in September 2021.\nBoeing developed the Starliner capsule as part of NASA's Commercial Crew Development program, which is launched on a United Launch Alliance Atlas V launch vehicle. Starliner made an uncrewed flight in December 2019. A second uncrewed flight attempt was launched in May 2022. A crewed flight to fully certify Starliner was launched in June 2024. Similar to SpaceX, development funding has been provided by a mix of government and private funds.\nVirgin Galactic is developing SpaceshipTwo, a commercial suborbital spacecraft aimed at the space tourism market. It reached space in December 2018.\nBlue Origin is in a multi-year test program of their New Shepard vehicle and has carried out thirty one launches as of May 2025, including twenty uncrewed test flights and eleven crewed flights. The first crewed flight, carrying founder Jeff Bezos, his brother Mark Bezos, aviator Wally Funk, and 18-year old Oliver Daemen launched on July 20, 2021.\nPassenger travel via spacecraft.\nOver the decades, a number of spacecraft have been proposed for spaceliner passenger travel. Somewhat analogous to travel by airliner after the middle of the 20th century, these vehicles are proposed to transport large numbers of passengers to destinations in space, or on Earth via suborbital spaceflights. To date, none of these concepts have been built, although a few vehicles that carry fewer than 10 persons are currently in the test flight phase of their development process.\nOne large spaceliner concept currently in early development is the SpaceX Starship, which, in addition to replacing the Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy launch vehicles in the legacy Earth-orbit market after 2020, has been proposed by SpaceX for long-distance commercial travel on Earth, flying 100+ people suborbitally between two points in under one hour, also known as \"Earth-to-Earth\".\nSmall spaceplane or small capsule suborbital spacecraft have been under development for the past decade or so; as of 2017[ [update]], at least one of each type is under development. Both Virgin Galactic and Blue Origin have craft in active development: the SpaceShipTwo spaceplane and the New Shepard capsule, respectively. Both would carry approximately a half-dozen passengers up to space for a brief time of zero gravity before returning to the launch location. XCOR Aerospace had been developing the Lynx single-passenger spaceplane since the 2000s, but development was halted in 2017.\nHuman representation and participation.\nParticipation and representation of humanity in space has been an issue ever since the first phase of space exploration. Some rights of non-spacefaring countries have been secured through international space law, declaring space the \"province of all mankind\", though the sharing of space by all humanity is sometimes criticized as imperialist and lacking. In addition to the lack of international inclusion, the inclusion of women and people of color has also been lacking. To make spaceflight more inclusive, organizations such as the \"Justspace Alliance\" and IAU-featured \"Inclusive Astronomy\" have been formed in recent years.\nWomen.\nThe first woman to ever enter space was Valentina Tereshkova. She flew in 1963, but it was not until the 1980s that another woman entered space. At the time, all astronauts were required to be military test pilots; women were not able to enter this career, which is one reason for the delay in allowing women to join space crews. After the rules were changed, Svetlana Savitskaya became the second woman to enter space; she was also from the Soviet Union. Sally Ride became the next woman to enter space and the first woman to enter space through the United States program.Since then, eleven other countries have allowed women astronauts. The first all-female spacewalk occurred in 2018, by Christina Koch and Jessica Meir. These two women had both participated in separate spacewalks with NASA. The first mission to the Moon with a woman aboard is planned for 2024.\nDespite these developments, women are still underrepresented among astronauts and especially cosmonauts. More than 600 people have flown in space but only 75 have been women. Issues that block potential applicants from the programs, and limit the space missions they are able to go on, are, for example:\nMilestones.\nBy country.\nThis is a list of major milestones achieved by country. Recorded is the first citizen and first spacecraft from each respective country to accomplish each milestone, regardless of mission type or intended outcome.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Yuri Gagarin was the first human in space and the first in Earth orbit, on Vostok 1.\n Either Robert M. White or Joseph A. Walker (depending on the definition of the space border) was the first to pilot a spaceplane, the North American X-15, on 17 July 1962 (White) or 19 July 1963 (Walker).\n Alexei Leonov was first to walk in space.\n Walter M. Schirra and Tom Stafford were first to perform a space rendezvous, piloting their Gemini 6A spacecraft to achieve station-keeping from Gemini 7 for over 5 hours.\n Neil Armstrong and David Scott were first to rendezvous and dock, piloting their Gemini 8 spacecraft to dock with an uncrewed Agena Target Vehicle.\n Frank Borman, Jim Lovell, and William Anders were the first to travel beyond low Earth orbit (LEO) and the first to orbit the Moon, on the Apollo 8 mission, which orbited the Moon ten times before returning to Earth.\n Apollo 10 reaches the fastest speed ever traveled by a human: 39,897 km/h (11.08 km/s or 24,791 mph), or roughly 1/27,000 of lightspeed.\n Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin were first to land on the Moon, during Apollo 11.\n The crew of Apollo 13 attained pericynthion above the Moon, setting the current record for the highest absolute altitude attained by a crewed spacecraft: from Earth.\n Valeri Polyakov performed the longest single spaceflight, from 8 January 1994 to 22 March 1995 (437 days, 17 hours, 58 minutes, and 16 seconds). Oleg Kononenko has spent the most total time in space on multiple missions, 1,110days, 14hours, 57minutes. \nThe International Space Station has the longest period of continuous human presence in space, 2 November 2000 to present (). This record was previously held by Mir, from Soyuz TM-8 on 5 September 1989 to the Soyuz TM-29 on 28 August 1999, a span of 3,644 days (almost 10 years).\n Yuri Gagarin became the first Soviet and the first human to reach space, on Vostok 1.\n Alan Shepard became the first American to reach space, on \"Freedom 7\".\n John Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth.\n Valentina Tereshkova became the first woman to go into space and to orbit the Earth.\n Vladim\u00edr Remek, a Czechoslovakian, became the first non-American and non-Soviet in space, as part of the Interkosmos program.\n Rakesh Sharma, became the first Indian in space and to orbit the Earth, on Soyuz T-11.\n Svetlana Savitskaya became the first woman to perform a spacewalk.\n Yang Liwei became the first Chinese in space and to orbit the Earth, on Shenzhou 5.\n Christina Koch and Jessica Meir conducted the first woman-only spacewalk.\nBy nationality or sex.\nSally Ride became the first American woman in space, in 1983. Eileen Collins was the first female Shuttle pilot, and with Shuttle mission STS-93 in 1999 she became the first woman to command a U.S. spacecraft.\nFor many years, the USSR (later Russia) and the United States were the only countries whose astronauts flew in space. That ended with the 1978 flight of Vladimir Remek. As of 2010[ [update]], citizens from 38 nations (including space tourists) have flown in space aboard Soviet, American, Russian, and Chinese spacecraft.\nSpace programs.\nHuman spaceflight programs have been conducted by the Soviet Union\u2013Russian Federation, the United States, Mainland China, and by American private spaceflight companies.\nCurrent programs.\nThe following space vehicles and spaceports are currently used for launching human spaceflights:\nThe following space stations are currently maintained in Earth orbit for human occupation:\nMost of the time, the only humans in space are those aboard the ISS, which generally has a crew of 7, and those aboard Tiangong, which generally has a crew of 3.\nNASA and ESA use the term \"human spaceflight\" to refer to their programs of launching people into space. These endeavors have also formerly been referred to as \"manned space missions\", though this is no longer official parlance according to NASA style guides, which call for gender-neutral language.\nPlanned future programs.\nUnder the Indian Human Spaceflight Program, India was planning to send humans into space on its orbital vehicle Gaganyaan before August 2022, but it has been delayed to 2024, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) began work on this project in 2006. The initial objective is to carry a crew of two or three to low Earth orbit (LEO) for a 3-to-7-day flight in a spacecraft on a LVM 3 rocket and return them safely for a water landing at a predefined landing zone. On 15 August 2018, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, declared India will independently send humans into space before the 75th anniversary of independence in 2022. In 2019, ISRO revealed plans for a space station by 2030, followed by a crewed lunar mission. The program envisages the development of a fully-autonomous orbital vehicle capable of carrying 2 or 3 crew members to an about low Earth orbit and bringing them safely back home.\nSince 2008, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency had developed the H-II Transfer Vehicle cargo-spacecraft-based crewed spacecraft and \"Kib\u014d\" Japanese Experiment Module\u2013based small space laboratory.\nNASA is developing a plan to land humans on Mars by the 2030s. The first step has begun with Artemis I in 2022, sending an uncrewed Orion spacecraft to a distant retrograde orbit around the Moon and returning it to Earth after a 25-day mission.\nSpaceX is developing Starship, a fully reusable two-stage system, with near-Earth and cislunar applications and an ultimate goal of landing on Mars. The upper stage of the Starship system, also called Starship, has had 9 atmospheric test flights as of September 2021. The first test flight of the fully integrated two-stage system occurred in April 2023. A modified version of Starship is being developed for the Artemis program.\nSeveral other countries and space agencies have announced and begun human spaceflight programs using natively developed equipment and technology, including Japan (JAXA), Iran (ISA), and North Korea (NADA). The plans for the Iranian crewed spacecraft are for a small spacecraft and space laboratory. North Korea's space program has plans for crewed spacecraft and small shuttle systems.\n \"This section lists all nations which have attempted human spaceflight programs. This is not to be confused with nations with citizens who have traveled into space, including space tourists, flown or intending to fly by a foreign country's or non-domestic private company's space systems \u2013 who are not counted in this list toward their country's national spacefaring attempts.\"\nSafety concerns.\nThere are two main sources of hazard in space flight: those due to the hostile space environment, and those due to possible equipment malfunctions. Addressing these issues is of great importance for NASA and other space agencies before conducting the first extended crewed missions to destinations such as Mars.\nEnvironmental hazards.\nPlanners of human spaceflight missions face a number of safety concerns.\nLife support.\nThe basic needs for breathable air and drinkable water are addressed by the life support system of the spacecraft.\nMedical issues.\nAstronauts may not be able to quickly return to Earth or receive medical supplies, equipment, or personnel if a medical emergency occurs. The astronauts may have to rely for long periods on limited resources and medical advice from the ground.\nThe possibility of blindness and of bone loss have been associated with human space flight.\nOn 31 December 2012, a NASA-supported study reported that spaceflight may harm the brains of astronauts and accelerate the onset of Alzheimer's disease.\nIn October 2015, the NASA Office of Inspector General issued a health hazards report related to space exploration, which included the potential hazards of a human mission to Mars.\nOn 2 November 2017, scientists reported, based on MRI studies, that significant changes in the position and structure of the brain have been found in astronauts who have taken trips in space. Astronauts on longer space trips were affected by greater brain changes.\nResearchers in 2018 reported, after detecting the presence on the International Space Station (ISS) of five \"Enterobacter bugandensis\" bacterial strains, none pathogenic to humans, that microorganisms on ISS should be carefully monitored to assure a healthy environment for astronauts.\nIn March 2019, NASA reported that latent viruses in humans may be activated during space missions, possibly adding more risk to astronauts in future deep-space missions.\nOn 25 September 2021, CNN reported that an alarm had sounded during the Inspiration4 Earth-orbital journey on the SpaceX Dragon 2. The alarm signal was found to be associated with an apparent toilet malfunction.\nMicrogravity.\nMedical data from astronauts in low Earth orbits for long periods, dating back to the 1970s, show several adverse effects of a microgravity environment: loss of bone density, decreased muscle strength and endurance, postural instability, and reductions in aerobic capacity. Over time these deconditioning effects can impair astronauts' performance or increase their risk of injury.\nIn a weightless environment, astronauts put almost no weight on the back muscles or leg muscles used for standing up, which causes the muscles to weaken and get smaller. Astronauts can lose up to twenty per cent of their muscle mass on spaceflights lasting five to eleven days. The consequent loss of strength could be a serious problem in case of a landing emergency. Upon returning to Earth from long-duration flights, astronauts are considerably weakened and are not allowed to drive a car for twenty-one days.\nAstronauts experiencing weightlessness will often lose their orientation, get motion sickness, and lose their sense of direction as their bodies try to get used to a weightless environment. When they get back to Earth, they have to readjust and may have problems standing up, focusing their gaze, walking, and turning. Importantly, those motor disturbances only get worse the longer the exposure to weightlessness. These changes can affect the ability to perform tasks required for approach and landing, docking, remote manipulation, and emergencies that may occur while landing.\nIn addition, after long space flight missions, male astronauts may experience severe eyesight problems, which may be a major concern for future deep space flight missions, including a crewed mission to the planet Mars. Long space flights can also alter a space traveler's eye movements.\nRadiation.\nWithout proper shielding, the crews of missions beyond low Earth orbit might be at risk from high-energy protons emitted by solar particle events (SPEs) associated with solar flares. If estimated correctly, the amount of radiation that astronauts would be exposed to from a solar storm similar to that of the most powerful in recorded history, the Carrington Event, would result in acute radiation sickness at least, and could even be fatal \"in a poorly shielded spacecraft\". Another storm that could have inflicted a potentially lethal dose of radiation on astronauts outside Earth's protective magnetosphere occurred during the Space Age, shortly after Apollo 16 landed and before Apollo 17 launched. This solar storm, which occurred in August 1972, could potentially have caused any astronauts who were exposed to it to suffer from acute radiation sickness, and may even have been lethal for those engaged in extravehicular activity or on the lunar surface.\nAnother type of radiation, galactic cosmic rays, presents further challenges to human spaceflight beyond low Earth orbit.\nThere is also some scientific concern that extended spaceflight might slow down the body's ability to protect itself against diseases, resulting in a weakened immune system and the activation of dormant viruses in the body. Radiation can cause both short- and long-term consequences to the bone marrow stem cells from which blood and immune-system cells are created. Because the interior of a spacecraft is so small, a weakened immune system and more active viruses in the body can lead to a fast spread of infection.\nIsolation.\nDuring long missions, astronauts are isolated and confined in small spaces. Depression, anxiety, cabin fever, and other psychological problems may occur more than for an average person and could impact the crew's safety and mission success. NASA spends millions of dollars on psychological treatments for astronauts and former astronauts. To date, there is no way to prevent or reduce mental problems caused by extended periods of stay in space.\nDue to these mental disorders, the efficiency of astronauts' work is impaired; and sometimes they are brought back to Earth, incurring the expense of their mission being aborted. A Russian expedition to space in 1976 was returned to Earth after the cosmonauts reported a strong odor that resulted in a fear of fluid leakage; but after a thorough investigation, it became clear that there was no leakage or technical malfunction. It was concluded by NASA that the cosmonauts most likely had hallucinated the smell.\nIt is possible that the mental health of astronauts can be affected by the changes in the sensory systems while in prolonged space travel.\nSensory systems.\nDuring astronauts' spaceflight, they are in an extreme environment. This, and the fact that little change is taking place in the environment, will result in the weakening of sensory input to the astronauts' seven senses.\nEquipment hazards.\nSpace flight requires much higher velocities than ground or air transportation, and consequently requires the use of high energy density propellants for launch, and the dissipation of large amounts of energy, usually as heat, for safe reentry through the Earth's atmosphere.\nLaunch.\nSince rockets have the potential for fire or explosive destruction, space capsules generally employ some sort of launch escape system, consisting either of a tower-mounted solid-fuel rocket to quickly carry the capsule away from the launch vehicle (employed on Mercury, Apollo, and Soyuz, the escape tower being discarded at some point after launch, at a point where an abort can be performed using the spacecraft's engines), or else ejection seats (employed on Vostok and Gemini) to carry astronauts out of the capsule and away for individual parachute landings.\nSuch a launch escape system is not always practical for multiple-crew-member vehicles (particularly spaceplanes), depending on the location of egress hatch(es). When the single-hatch Vostok capsule was modified to become the 2 or 3-person Voskhod, the single-cosmonaut ejection seat could not be used, and no escape tower system was added. The two Voskhod flights in 1964 and 1965 avoided launch mishaps. The Space Shuttle carried ejection seats and escape hatches for its pilot and copilot in early flights; but these could not be used for passengers who sat below the flight deck on later flights, and so were discontinued.\nThere have been only two in-flight launch aborts of a crewed flight. The first occurred on Soyuz 18a on 5 April 1975. The abort occurred after the launch escape system had been jettisoned when the launch vehicle's spent second stage failed to separate before the third stage ignited and the vehicle strayed off course. The crew finally managed to separate the spacecraft, firing its engines to pull it away from the errant rocket, and both cosmonauts landed safely. The second occurred on 11 October 2018 with the launch of Soyuz MS-10. Again, both crew members survived.\nIn the first use of a launch escape system on the launchpad, before the start of a crewed flight, happened during the planned Soyuz T-10a launch on 26 September 1983, which was aborted by a launch vehicle fire 90 seconds before liftoff. Both cosmonauts aboard landed safely.\nThe only crew fatality during launch occurred on 28 January 1986, when the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" broke apart 73 seconds after liftoff, due to the failure of a solid rocket booster seal, which caused the failure of the external fuel tank, resulting in an explosion of the fuel and separation of the boosters. All seven crew members were killed.\nExtravehicular activity.\nTasks outside a spacecraft require use of a space suit. Despite the risk of mechanical failures while working in open space, there have been no spacewalk fatalities. Spacewalking astronauts routinely remain attached to the spacecraft with tethers and sometimes supplementary anchors. Un-tethered spacewalks were performed on three missions in 1984 using the Manned Maneuvering Unit, and on a flight test in 1994 of the Simplified Aid For EVA Rescue (SAFER) device.\nReentry and landing.\nThe single pilot of Soyuz 1, Vladimir Komarov, was killed when his capsule's parachutes failed during an emergency landing on 24 April 1967, causing the capsule to crash.\nOn 1 February 2003, the crew of seven aboard the Space Shuttle \"Columbia\" were killed on reentry after completing a successful mission in space. A wing-leading-edge reinforced carbon-carbon heat shield had been damaged by a piece of frozen external tank foam insulation that had broken off and struck the wing during launch. Hot reentry gasses entered and destroyed the wing structure, leading to the breakup of the orbiter vehicle.\nArtificial atmosphere.\nThere are two basic choices for an artificial atmosphere: either an Earth-like mixture of oxygen and an inert gas such as nitrogen or helium, or pure oxygen, which can be used at lower than standard atmospheric pressure. A nitrogen\u2013oxygen mixture is used in the International Space Station and Soyuz spacecraft, while low-pressure pure oxygen is commonly used in space suits for extravehicular activity.\nThe use of a gas mixture carries the risk of decompression sickness (commonly known as \"the bends\") when transitioning to or from the pure oxygen space suit environment. There have been instances of injury and fatalities caused by suffocation in the presence of too much nitrogen and not enough oxygen.\nA pure oxygen atmosphere carries the risk of fire. The original design of the Apollo spacecraft used pure oxygen at greater than atmospheric pressure prior to launch. An electrical fire started in the cabin of Apollo 1 during a ground test at Cape Kennedy Air Force Station Launch Complex 34 on 27 January 1967, and spread rapidly. The high pressure, increased by the fire, prevented removal of the plug door hatch cover in time to rescue the crew. All three astronauts\u2014Gus Grissom, Ed White, and Roger Chaffee\u2014were killed. This led NASA to use a nitrogen\u2013oxygen atmosphere before launch, and low-pressure pure oxygen only in space.\nReliability.\nThe March 1966 Gemini 8 mission was aborted in orbit when an attitude control system thruster stuck in the on position, sending the craft into a dangerous spin that threatened the lives of Neil Armstrong and David Scott. Armstrong had to shut the control system off and use the reentry control system to stop the spin. The craft made an emergency reentry and the astronauts landed safely. The most probable cause was determined to be an electrical short due to a static electricity discharge, which caused the thruster to remain powered even when switched off. The control system was modified to put each thruster on its own isolated circuit.\nThe third lunar landing expedition, Apollo 13, in April 1970, was aborted and the lives of the crew\u2014James Lovell, Jack Swigert, and Fred Haise\u2014were threatened after the failure of a cryogenic liquid oxygen tank en route to the Moon. The tank burst when electrical power was applied to internal stirring fans in the tank, causing the immediate loss of all of its contents, and also damaging the second tank, causing the gradual loss of its remaining oxygen over a period of 130 minutes. This in turn caused a loss of electrical power provided by fuel cells to the command spacecraft. The crew managed to return to Earth safely by using the lunar landing craft as a \"life boat\". The tank failure was determined to be caused by two mistakes: the tank's drain fitting had been damaged when it was dropped during factory testing, necessitating the use of its internal heaters to boil out the oxygen after a pre-launch test; which in turn damaged the fan wiring's electrical insulation because the thermostats on the heaters did not meet the required voltage rating due to a vendor miscommunication.\nThe crew of Soyuz 11 were killed on 30 June 1971 by a combination of mechanical malfunctions; the crew were asphyxiated due to cabin decompression following the separation of their descent capsule from the service module. A cabin ventilation valve had been jolted open at an altitude of by the stronger-than-expected shock of explosive separation bolts, which were designed to fire sequentially, but in fact had fired simultaneously. The loss of pressure became fatal within about 30 seconds.\nFatality risk.\nAs of December\u00a02015[ [update]], 23 crew members have died in accidents aboard spacecraft. Over 100 others have died in accidents during activities directly related to spaceflight or testing.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18897", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18897", "title": "Martial Arts Film", "text": ""}
{"id": "18899", "revid": "10274643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18899", "title": "Mendelevium", "text": "element with atomic number 101 (Md)\nMendelevium is a synthetic chemical element; it has symbol Md (formerly Mv) and atomic number 101. A metallic radioactive transuranium element in the actinide series, it is the first element by atomic number that currently cannot be produced in macroscopic quantities by neutron bombardment of lighter elements. It is the thirteenth actinide, the ninth transuranic element, and the first transfermium; it is named after Dmitri Mendeleev, the father of the periodic table. \nLike all the transfermiums, it can only be produced in particle accelerators by bombarding lighter elements with charged particles. The element was first produced in 1955 by bombarding einsteinium with alpha particles, the method still used today. Using commonly-available microgram quantities of einsteinium-253, over a million mendelevium atoms may be made each hour. The chemistry of mendelevium is typical for the late actinides, with a dominant +3 oxidation state but also a +2 oxidation state accessible in solution. All known isotopes of mendelevium have short half-lives; there are currently no uses for it outside basic scientific research, and only small amounts are produced.\nDiscovery.\nMendelevium was the ninth transuranic element to be synthesized. It was first synthesized by Albert Ghiorso, Glenn T. Seaborg, Gregory Robert Choppin, Bernard G. Harvey, and team leader Stanley G. Thompson in early 1955 at the University of California, Berkeley. The team produced 256Md (half-life 77.7 minutes) when they bombarded an 253Es target consisting of only a billion (109) einsteinium atoms with alpha particles (helium nuclei) in the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory's 60-inch cyclotron, thus increasing the target's atomic number by two. 256Md thus became the first isotope of any element to be synthesized one atom at a time. In total, seventeen mendelevium atoms were detected. This discovery was part of a program, begun in 1952, that irradiated plutonium with neutrons to transmute it into heavier actinides. This method was necessary because of a lack of known beta decaying isotopes of fermium that might allow production by neutron capture; it is now known that such production is impossible at any possible reactor flux due to the very short half-life to spontaneous fission of 258Fm and subsequent isotopes, which still do not beta decay - the fermium gap that, as far as we know, sets a hard limit to the success of neutron capture processes.\nTo predict if the production of mendelevium would be possible, the team made use of a rough calculation. The number of atoms that would be produced would be approximately equal to the product of the number of atoms of target material, the target's cross section, the ion beam intensity, and the time of bombardment; this last factor was related to the half-life of the product when bombarding for a time on the order of its half-life. This gave one atom per experiment. Thus under optimum conditions, the preparation of only one atom of element 101 per experiment could be expected. This calculation demonstrated that it was feasible to go ahead with the experiment. The target material, einsteinium-253, could be produced readily from irradiating plutonium: one year of irradiation would give a billion atoms, and its three-week half-life meant that the element 101 experiments could be conducted in one week after the produced einsteinium was separated and purified to make the target. However, it was necessary to upgrade the cyclotron to obtain the needed intensity of 1014 alpha particles per second; Seaborg applied for the necessary funds.\nWhile Seaborg applied for funding, Harvey worked on the einsteinium target, while Thomson and Choppin focused on methods for chemical isolation. Choppin suggested using \u03b1-hydroxyisobutyric acid to separate the mendelevium atoms from those of the lighter actinides. The initial separation was done by a recoil technique suggested by Albert Ghiorso: the einsteinium was placed on the opposite side of the target from the beam, so that the momentum of the recoiling mendelevium atoms would allow them to leave the target and be caught on a gold catcher foil behind it. This recoil target was made by an electroplating technique, developed by Alfred Chetham-Strode. This technique gave a very high yield, which was absolutely necessary when working with such a rare and valuable product as the einsteinium target material. The recoil target consisted of 109 atoms of 253Es which were deposited electrolytically on a thin gold foil. It was bombarded by 41\u00a0MeV alpha particles in the Berkeley cyclotron with a very high beam density of 6\u00d71013 particles per second over an area of 0.05\u00a0cm2. The target was cooled by water or liquid helium, and the foil could be replaced.\nInitial experiments were carried out in September 1954. No alpha decay was seen from mendelevium atoms; thus, Ghiorso suggested that the mendelevium had all decayed by electron capture to fermium-256, correctly believed to decay primarily by fission, and that the experiment should be repeated, this time searching for those spontaneous fission events. This version of the experiment was performed in February 1955.\nOn the day of discovery, 19 February, alpha irradiation of the einsteinium target occurred in three three-hour sessions. The cyclotron was in the University of California campus, while the Radiation Laboratory was on the next hill. To deal with this situation, a complex procedure was used: Ghiorso took the catcher foils (there were three targets and three foils) from the cyclotron to Harvey, who would use aqua regia to dissolve it and pass it through an anion-exchange resin column to separate the transuranium elements from the gold and other products. The resultant drops entered a test tube, which Choppin and Ghiorso took in a car to get to the Radiation Laboratory as soon as possible. Thompson and Choppin used a cation-exchange resin column and the \u03b1-hydroxyisobutyric acid. The solution drops were collected on platinum disks and dried under heat lamps. The three disks were expected to contain, respectively, the fermium, no new elements, and the mendelevium. Finally, they were placed in their own counters, which were connected to recorders such that spontaneous fission events would be recorded as huge deflections in a graph showing the number and time of the decays. There thus was no direct detection, but by observation of spontaneous fission events arising from its electron-capture daughter 256Fm. The first one was identified with a \"hooray\" followed by a \"double hooray\" and a \"triple hooray\". The fourth one eventually officially proved the chemical identification of the 101st element, mendelevium. In total, five decays were reported up until 4\u00a0a.m. Seaborg was notified and the team left to sleep. Additional analysis and further experimentation showed the produced mendelevium isotope to have the expected mass of 256 and decay by electron capture to fermium-256 (half-life 157.6\u00a0minutes), the source of the observed fission.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We thought it fitting that there be an element named for the Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev, who had developed the periodic table. In nearly all our experiments discovering transuranium elements, we'd depended on his method of predicting chemical properties based on the element's position in the table. But in the middle of the Cold War, naming an element for a Russian was a somewhat bold gesture that did not sit well with some American critics.\u2014\u200a\nBeing the first of the second hundred of the chemical elements, it was decided that the element would be named \"mendelevium\" after the Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev, father of the periodic table. Because this discovery came during the Cold War, Seaborg had to request permission from the government of the United States to propose that the element be named for a Russian, but it was granted. The name \"mendelevium\" was accepted by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) in 1955 with symbol \"Mv\", which was changed to \"Md\" in the next IUPAC General Assembly (Paris, 1957).\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical.\nIn the periodic table, mendelevium is located to the right of the actinide fermium, to the left of the actinide nobelium, and below the lanthanide thulium. Mendelevium metal has not yet been prepared in bulk quantities, and bulk preparation is currently impossible. Nevertheless, a number of predictions and some preliminary experimental results have been done regarding its properties.\nThe lanthanides and actinides, in the metallic state, can exist as either divalent (such as europium and ytterbium) or trivalent (most other lanthanides) metals. The former have f\"n\"s2 configurations, whereas the latter have f\"n\"\u22121d1s2 configurations. In 1975, Johansson and Rosengren examined the measured and predicted values for the cohesive energies (enthalpies of crystallization) of the metallic lanthanides and actinides, both as divalent and trivalent metals. The conclusion was that the increased binding energy of the [Rn]5f126d17s2 configuration over the [Rn]5f137s2 configuration for mendelevium was not enough to compensate for the energy needed to promote one 5f electron to 6d, as is true also for the very late actinides: thus einsteinium, fermium, mendelevium, and nobelium were expected to be divalent metals. The increasing predominance of the divalent state well before the actinide series concludes is attributed to the relativistic stabilization of the 5f electrons, which increases with increasing atomic number. Thermochromatographic studies with trace quantities of mendelevium by Zvara and H\u00fcbener from 1976 to 1982 confirmed this prediction. In 1990, Haire and Gibson estimated mendelevium metal to have an enthalpy of sublimation between 134 and 142\u00a0kJ/mol. Divalent mendelevium metal should have a metallic radius of around . Like the other divalent late actinides (except the once again trivalent lawrencium), metallic mendelevium should assume a face-centered cubic crystal structure. Mendelevium's melting point has been estimated at 800\u00a0\u00b0C, the same value as that predicted for the neighbouring element nobelium. Its density is predicted to be around .\nChemical.\nThe chemistry of mendelevium is known largely in solution (as available quantities do not allow the creation of pure compounds), in which it can take on the +3 or +2 oxidation states. The +1 state has also been reported, but has not yet been confirmed.\nBefore mendelevium's discovery, Seaborg and Katz predicted that it should be predominantly trivalent in aqueous solution and hence should behave similarly to other tripositive lanthanides and actinides. After the synthesis of mendelevium in 1955, these predictions were confirmed, first in the observation at its discovery that it eluted just after fermium in the trivalent actinide elution sequence from a cation-exchange column of resin, and later the 1967 observation that mendelevium could form insoluble hydroxides and fluorides that coprecipitated with trivalent lanthanide salts. Cation-exchange and solvent extraction studies led to the conclusion that mendelevium was a trivalent actinide with an ionic radius somewhat smaller than that of the previous actinide, fermium. Mendelevium can form coordination complexes with 1,2-cyclohexanedinitrilotetraacetic acid (DCTA).\nIn reducing conditions, mendelevium(III) can be easily reduced to mendelevium(II), which is stable in aqueous solution. The standard reduction potential of the \"E\"\u00b0(Md3+\u2192Md2+) couple was variously estimated in 1967 as \u22120.10\u00a0V or \u22120.20\u00a0V: later 2013 experiments established the value as . In comparison, \"E\"\u00b0(Md3+\u2192Md0) should be around \u22121.74\u00a0V, and \"E\"\u00b0(Md2+\u2192Md0) should be around \u22122.5\u00a0V. Mendelevium(II)'s elution behavior has been compared with that of strontium(II) and europium(II).\nIn 1973, mendelevium(I) was reported to have been produced by Russian scientists, who obtained it by reducing higher oxidation states of mendelevium with samarium(II). It was found to be stable in neutral water\u2013ethanol solution and be homologous to caesium(I). However, later experiments found no evidence for mendelevium(I) and found that mendelevium behaved like divalent elements when reduced, not like the monovalent alkali metals. Nevertheless, the Russian team conducted further studies on the thermodynamics of cocrystallizing mendelevium with alkali metal chlorides, and concluded that mendelevium(I) had formed and could form mixed crystals with divalent elements, thus cocrystallizing with them. The status of the +1 oxidation state is still tentative.\nThe electrode potential \"E\"\u00b0(Md4+\u2192Md3+) was predicted in 1975 to be +5.4\u00a0V; 1967 experiments with the strong oxidizing agent sodium bismuthate were unable to oxidize mendelevium(III) to mendelevium(IV).\nAtomic.\nA mendelevium atom has 101 electrons. They are expected to be arranged in the configuration [Rn]5f137s2 (ground state term symbol 2F7/2), although experimental verification of this electron configuration had not yet been made as of 2006. The fifteen electrons in the 5f and 7s subshells are valence electrons. In forming compounds, three valence electrons may be lost, leaving behind a [Rn]5f12 core: this conforms to the trend set by the other actinides with their [Rn]\u00a05f\"n\" electron configurations in the tripositive state. The first ionization potential of mendelevium was measured to be at most (6.58\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.07)\u00a0eV in 1974, based on the assumption that the 7s electrons would ionise before the 5f ones; this value has not yet been refined further due to the lack to larger samples of mendelevium. The ionic radius of hexacoordinate Md3+ had been preliminarily estimated in 1978 to be around 91.2\u00a0pm; 1988 calculations based on the logarithmic trend between distribution coefficients and ionic radius produced a value of 89.6\u00a0pm, as well as an enthalpy of hydration of . Md2+ should have an ionic radius of 115\u00a0pm and hydration enthalpy \u22121413\u00a0kJ/mol; Md+ should have ionic radius 117\u00a0pm.\nIsotopes.\nSeventeen isotopes of mendelevium are known, with mass numbers from 244 to 260; all are radioactive. The longest-lived isotope is 258Md with a half-life of 51.6\u00a0days. Nevertheless, the shorter-lived 256Md (half-life 77.7\u00a0minutes) is more often used in chemical experiments because it can be produced in larger quantities from einsteinium, as 258Md would require 255Es, of which significant quantities are available only as a minor component of an isotopic mixture.\nThe half-lives of mendelevium isotopes mostly increase smoothly (apart from odd/even effects) toward higher mass, up to 258Md, then decrease (as indicated by what experimental data is available) as spontaneous fission becomes the dominant decay mode; the second longest-living isotope is 260Md, the heaviest known, with a half-life of 27.8\u00a0days. Mendelevium is the last element that has any known isotope with a half-life longer than a day.\nMendelevium-256, the currently most important isotope of mendelevium, decays about 90% through electron capture and 10% through alpha decay. It is most easily detected through the spontaneous fission of its electron capture daughter fermium-256, but in the presence of other nuclides that undergo spontaneous fission, alpha decays at the characteristic energies for mendelevium-256 (7.205 and 7.139\u00a0MeV) can provide more useful identification.\nProduction and isolation.\nThe lightest isotopes (244Md to 247Md) are mostly produced through bombardment of bismuth targets with argon ions, while slightly heavier ones (248Md to 253Md) are produced by bombarding plutonium and americium targets with ions of carbon and nitrogen. The most important and most stable isotopes are in the range from 254Md to 258Md and are produced through bombardment of einsteinium with alpha particles: einsteinium-253, \u2212254, and \u2212255 can all be used. 259Md is produced as a daughter of 259No, and 260Md can be produced in a transfer reaction between einsteinium-254 and oxygen-18. Typically, the most commonly used isotope 256Md is produced by bombarding either einsteinium-253 or \u2212254 with alpha particles: einsteinium-254 is preferred when available because it has a longer half-life and therefore can be used as a target for longer. Using available microgram quantities of einsteinium, femtogram quantities of mendelevium-256 may be produced.\nThe recoil momentum of the produced mendelevium-256 atoms is used to bring them physically far away from the einsteinium target from which they are produced, bringing them onto a thin foil of metal (usually beryllium, aluminium, platinum, or gold) just behind the target in a vacuum. This eliminates the need for immediate chemical separation, which is both costly and prevents reusing of the expensive einsteinium target. The mendelevium atoms are then trapped in a gas atmosphere (frequently helium), and a gas jet from a small opening in the reaction chamber carries the mendelevium along. Using a long capillary tube, and including potassium chloride aerosols in the helium gas, the mendelevium atoms can be transported over tens of meters to be chemically analysed and have their quantity determined. The mendelevium can then be separated from the foil material and other fission products by applying acid to the foil and then coprecipitating the mendelevium with lanthanum fluoride, then using a cation-exchange resin column with a 10% ethanol solution saturated with hydrochloric acid, acting as an eluant. However, if the foil is made of gold and thin enough, it is enough to simply dissolve the gold in aqua regia before separating the trivalent actinides from the gold using anion-exchange chromatography, the eluant being 6\u00a0M\u00a0hydrochloric acid.\nMendelevium can finally be separated from the other trivalent actinides using selective elution from a cation-exchange resin column, the eluant being ammonia \u03b1-HIB.&lt; Using the gas-jet method often renders the first two steps unnecessary.\nAnother possible way to separate the trivalent actinides is via solvent extraction chromatography using bis-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (abbreviated as HDEHP) as the stationary organic phase and nitric acid as the mobile aqueous phase. The actinide elution sequence is reversed from that of the cation-exchange resin column, so that the heavier actinides elute later. The mendelevium separated by this method has the advantage of being free of organic complexing agent compared to the resin column; the disadvantage is that mendelevium then elutes very late in the elution sequence, after fermium.\nAnother method to isolate mendelevium exploits the distinct elution properties of Md2+ from those of Es3+ and Fm3+. The initial steps are the same as above, and employs HDEHP for extraction chromatography, but coprecipitates the mendelevium with terbium fluoride instead of lanthanum fluoride. Then, 50\u00a0mg of chromium is added to the mendelevium to reduce it to the +2 state in 0.1\u00a0M\u00a0hydrochloric acid with zinc or mercury. The solvent extraction then proceeds, and while the trivalent and tetravalent lanthanides and actinides remain on the column, mendelevium(II) does not and stays in the hydrochloric acid. It is then reoxidized to the +3 state using hydrogen peroxide and then isolated by selective elution with 2\u00a0M\u00a0hydrochloric acid (to remove impurities, including chromium) and finally 6\u00a0M\u00a0hydrochloric acid (to remove the mendelevium). It is also possible to use a column of cationite and zinc amalgam, using 1\u00a0M\u00a0hydrochloric acid as an eluant, to effect the reduction. Thermochromatographic chemical isolation could be achieved using the volatile mendelevium hexafluoroacetylacetonate: the analogous fermium compound is known and similar.\nToxicity.\nThough few people come in contact with mendelevium, the International Commission on Radiological Protection has set annual exposure limits for the most stable isotope. For mendelevium-258, the ingestion limit was set at 9\u00d7105 becquerels (1 Bq = 1 decay per second). Given the half-life of this isotope, this is only 2.48\u00a0ng (nanograms). The inhalation limit is at 6000 Bq or 16.5 pg (picogram).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18900", "revid": "18577684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18900", "title": "Modus ponens", "text": "Rule of logical inference\nIn propositional logic, ' (; MP), also known as ' (from la\u00a0'mode that by affirming affirms'), implication elimination, or affirming the antecedent, is a deductive argument form and rule of inference. It can be summarized as \"\"P\" implies \"Q.\" \"P\" is true. Therefore, \"Q\" must also be true.\"\n\"Modus ponens\" is a mixed hypothetical syllogism and is closely related to another valid form of argument, \"modus tollens\". Both have apparently similar but invalid forms: affirming the consequent and denying the antecedent. Constructive dilemma is the disjunctive version of \"modus ponens\".\nThe history of \"modus ponens\" goes back to antiquity. The first to explicitly describe the argument form \"modus ponens\" was Theophrastus. It, along with \"modus tollens\", is one of the standard patterns of inference that can be applied to derive chains of conclusions that lead to the desired goal.\nExplanation.\nThe form of a \"modus ponens\" argument is a mixed hypothetical syllogism, with two premises and a conclusion:\nThe first premise is a conditional (\"if\u2013then\") claim, namely that \"P\" implies \"Q\". The second premise is an assertion that \"P\", the antecedent of the conditional claim, is the case. From these two premises it can be logically concluded that \"Q\", the consequent of the conditional claim, must be the case as well.\nAn example of an argument that fits the form \"modus ponens\":\nThis argument is valid, but this has no bearing on whether any of the statements in the argument are actually true; for \"modus ponens\" to be a sound argument, the premises must be true for any true instances of the conclusion. An argument can be valid but nonetheless unsound if one or more premises are false; if an argument is valid \"and\" all the premises are true, then the argument is sound. For example, John might be going to work on Wednesday. In this case, the reasoning for John's going to work (because it is Wednesday) is unsound. The argument is only sound on Tuesdays (when John goes to work), but valid on every day of the week. A propositional argument using \"modus ponens\" is said to be deductive.\nIn single-conclusion sequent calculi, \"modus ponens\" is the Cut rule. The cut-elimination theorem for a calculus says that every proof involving Cut can be transformed (generally, by a constructive method) into a proof without Cut, and hence that Cut is admissible.\nThe Curry\u2013Howard correspondence between proofs and programs relates \"modus ponens\" to function application: if \"f\" is a function of type \"P\" \u2192 \"Q\" and \"x\" is of type \"P\", then \"f x\" is of type \"Q\".\nIn artificial intelligence, \"modus ponens\" is often called forward chaining.\nFormal notation.\nThe \"modus ponens\" rule may be written in sequent notation as\nformula_1\nwhere \"P\", \"Q\" and \"P\" \u2192 \"Q\" are statements (or propositions) in a formal language and \u22a2 is a metalogical symbol meaning that \"Q\" is a syntactic consequence of \"P\" and \"P\" \u2192 \"Q\" in some logical system.\nIn classical two-valued logic, \"modus ponens\" can be interpreted from the material conditional (implication) operator. The notion of implication as a rigorous mathematical construct can be traced back to around the turn of the 19th century with early works of mathematical logic, such as Begriffsschrift and Principia Mathematica. Given two variables \"p\" and \"q\" that can either be true or false, implication (\"p\" \u2192 \"q\") is defined as all cases being true except where \"p\" is true and \"q\" is false. By the assumptions of \"modus ponens\", \"p\" \u2192 \"q\" and \"p\" are true, and by the definition of implication, it can be deduced that \"q\" must also be true.\nStatus.\nWhile \"modus ponens\" is one of the most commonly used argument forms in logic, it must not be mistaken for a logical law; rather, it is one of the accepted mechanisms for the construction of deductive proofs that includes the \"rule of definition\" and the \"rule of substitution\". \"Modus ponens\" allows one to eliminate a conditional statement from a logical proof or argument (the antecedents) and thereby not carry these antecedents forward in an ever-lengthening string of symbols; for this reason modus ponens is sometimes called the rule of detachment or the law of detachment. Enderton, for example, observes that \"modus ponens can produce shorter formulas from longer ones\", and Russell observes that \"the process of the inference cannot be reduced to symbols. Its sole record is the occurrence of \u22a6q [the consequent] ... an inference is the dropping of a true premise; it is the dissolution of an implication\".\nA justification for the \"trust in inference is the belief that if the two former assertions [the antecedents] are not in error, the final assertion [the consequent] is not in error\". In other words: if one statement or proposition implies a second one, and the first statement or proposition is true, then the second one is also true. If \"P\" implies \"Q\" and \"P\" is true, then \"Q\" is true.\nCorrespondence to other mathematical frameworks.\nAlgebraic semantics.\nIn mathematical logic, algebraic semantics treats every sentence as a name for an element in an ordered set. Typically, the set can be visualized as a lattice-like structure with a single element (the \"always-true\") at the top and another single element (the \"always-false\") at the bottom. Logical equivalence becomes identity, so that when formula_2 and formula_3, for instance, are equivalent (as is standard), then formula_4. Logical implication becomes a matter of relative position: formula_5 logically implies formula_6 just in case formula_7, i.e., when either formula_8 or else formula_5 lies below formula_6 and is connected to it by an upward path.\nIn this context, to say that formula_11 and formula_12 together imply formula_6\u2014that is, to affirm \"modus ponens\" as valid\u2014is to say that the highest point which lies below both formula_5 and formula_12 lies below formula_6, i.e., that formula_17. In the semantics for basic propositional logic, the algebra is Boolean, with formula_18 construed as the material conditional: formula_19. Confirming that formula_17 is then straightforward, because formula_21 and formula_22. With other treatments of formula_18, the semantics becomes more complex, the algebra may be non-Boolean, and the validity of modus ponens cannot be taken for granted.\nProbability calculus.\nIf formula_24 and formula_25, then formula_26 must lie in the interval formula_27. For the special case formula_28, formula_26 must equal formula_30.\nSubjective logic.\n\"Modus ponens\" represents an instance of the binomial deduction operator in subjective logic expressed as:\nformula_31\nwhere formula_32 denotes the subjective opinion about formula_5 as expressed by source formula_34, and the conditional opinion formula_35 generalizes the logical implication formula_36. The deduced marginal opinion about formula_6 is denoted by formula_38. The case where formula_32 is an absolute TRUE opinion about formula_5 is equivalent to source formula_34 saying that formula_5 is TRUE, and the case where formula_32 is an absolute FALSE opinion about formula_5 is equivalent to source formula_34 saying that formula_5 is FALSE. The deduction operator formula_47 of subjective logic produces an absolute TRUE deduced opinion formula_38 when the conditional opinion formula_35 is absolute TRUE and the antecedent opinion formula_32 is absolute TRUE. Hence, subjective logic deduction represents a generalization of both \"modus ponens\" and the Law of total probability.\nAlleged cases of failure.\nPhilosophers and linguists have identified a variety of cases where \"modus ponens\" appears to fail. Vann McGee, for instance, argued that \"modus ponens\" can fail for conditionals whose consequents are themselves conditionals. The following is an example:\nSince Shakespeare did write \"Hamlet\", the first premise is true. The second premise is also true, since starting with a set of possible authors limited to just Shakespeare and Hobbes and eliminating one of them leaves only the other. However, the conclusion is doubtful, since ruling out Shakespeare as the author of \"Hamlet\" would leave numerous possible candidates, many of them more plausible alternatives than Hobbes (if the if-thens in the inference are read as material conditionals, the conclusion comes out true simply by virtue of the false antecedent. This is one of the paradoxes of material implication).\nThe general form of McGee-type counterexamples to \"modus ponens\" is simply formula_51, therefore, formula_52; it is not essential that formula_5 be a disjunction, as in the example given. That these kinds of cases constitute failures of \"modus ponens\" remains a controversial view among logicians, but opinions vary on how the cases should be disposed of, and some authors have rejected McGee's argument.\nIn deontic logic, some examples of conditional obligation also raise the possibility of \"modus ponens\" failure. These are cases where the conditional premise describes an obligation predicated on an immoral or imprudent action, e.g., \"If Doe murders his mother, he ought to do so gently,\" for which the dubious unconditional conclusion would be \"Doe ought to gently murder his mother.\" It would appear to follow that if Doe is in fact gently murdering his mother, then by \"modus ponens\" it appears that he is doing exactly what he should, unconditionally, be doing. Here again, \"modus ponens\"' failure is not a popular diagnosis and is criticized by some authors, but is sometimes argued for.\nPossible fallacies.\nThe fallacy of affirming the consequent is a common misinterpretation of the \"modus ponens\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18901", "revid": "48718214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18901", "title": "Modus tollens", "text": "Rule of logical inference\nIn propositional logic, modus tollens () (MT), also known as modus tollendo tollens (Latin for \"mode that by denying denies\") and denying the consequent, is a deductive argument form and a rule of inference. \"Modus tollens\" is a mixed hypothetical syllogism that takes the form of \"If \"P\", then \"Q\". Not \"Q\". Therefore, not \"P\".\" It is an application of the general truth that if a statement is true, then so is its contrapositive. The form shows that inference from \"P implies Q\" to \"the negation of Q implies the negation of P\" is a valid argument.\nThe history of the inference rule \"modus tollens\" goes back to antiquity. The first to explicitly describe the argument form \"modus tollens\" was Theophrastus.\n\"Modus tollens\" is closely related to \"modus ponens\". There are two similar, but invalid, forms of argument: affirming the consequent and denying the antecedent. See also contraposition and proof by contrapositive.\nExplanation.\nThe form of a \"modus tollens\" argument is a mixed hypothetical syllogism, with two premises and a conclusion:\nIf \"P\", then \"Q\".\nNot \"Q\".\nTherefore, not \"P\".\nThe first premise is a conditional (\"if-then\") claim, such as \"P\" implies \"Q\". The second premise is an assertion that \"Q\", the consequent of the conditional claim, is not the case. From these two premises it can be logically concluded that \"P\", the antecedent of the conditional claim, is also not the case.\nFor example:\nIf the dog detects an intruder, the dog will bark.\nThe dog did not bark.\nTherefore, no intruder was detected by the dog.\nSupposing that the premises are both true (the dog will bark if it detects an intruder, and does indeed not bark), it logically follows that no intruder has been detected. This is a valid argument since it is not possible for the conclusion to be false if the premises are true. (It is conceivable that there may have been an intruder that the dog did not detect, but that does not invalidate the argument; the first premise is \"if the dog \"detects\" an intruder\". The thing of importance is that the dog detects or does not detect an intruder, not whether there is one.)\nExample 1:\nIf I am the burglar, then I can crack a safe.\nI cannot crack a safe.\nTherefore, I am not the burglar.\nExample 2: \nIf Rex is a chicken, then he is a bird.\nRex is not a bird.\nTherefore, Rex is not a chicken.\nRelation to \"modus ponens\".\nEvery use of \"modus tollens\" can be converted to a use of \"modus ponens\" and one use of transposition to the premise which is a material implication. For example:\nIf \"P\", then \"Q\". (premise \u2013 material implication)\nIf not \"Q\", then not \"P\". (derived by transposition)\nNot \"Q\" . (premise)\nTherefore, not \"P\". (derived by \"modus ponens\")\nLikewise, every use of \"modus ponens\" can be converted to a use of \"modus tollens\" and transposition.\nFormal notation.\nThe \"modus tollens\" rule can be stated formally as:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 stands for the statement \"P implies Q\". formula_3 stands for \"it is not the case that Q\" (or in brief \"not Q\"). Then, whenever \"formula_2\" and \"formula_5\" each appear by themselves as a line of a proof, then \"formula_6\" can validly be placed on a subsequent line.\nThe \"modus tollens\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\nformula_7\nwhere formula_8 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_6 is a syntactic consequence of formula_2 and formula_5 in some logical system;\nor as the statement of a functional tautology or theorem of propositional logic:\nformula_12\nwhere formula_13 and formula_14 are propositions expressed in some formal system;\nor including assumptions:\nformula_15\nthough since the rule does not change the set of assumptions, this is not strictly necessary.\nMore complex rewritings involving \"modus tollens\" are often seen, for instance in set theory:\nformula_16\nformula_17\nformula_18\nAlso in first-order predicate logic:\nformula_19\nformula_20\nformula_21\nStrictly speaking these are not instances of \"modus tollens\", but they may be derived from \"modus tollens\" using a few extra steps.\nJustification via truth table.\nThe validity of \"modus tollens\" can be clearly demonstrated through a truth table.\nIn instances of \"modus tollens\" we assume as premises that p \u2192 q is true and q is false. There is only one line of the truth table\u2014the fourth line\u2014which satisfies these two conditions. In this line, p is false. Therefore, in every instance in which p \u2192 q is true and q is false, p must also be false.\nCorrespondence to other mathematical frameworks.\nProbability calculus.\n\"Modus tollens\" represents an instance of the law of total probability combined with Bayes' theorem expressed as:\nformula_22\nwhere the conditionals formula_23 and formula_24 are obtained with (the extended form of) Bayes' theorem expressed as:\nformula_25 and formula_26\nIn the equations above formula_27 denotes the probability of formula_14, and formula_29 denotes the base rate (aka. prior probability) of formula_13. The conditional probability formula_31 generalizes the logical statement formula_2, i.e. in addition to assigning TRUE or FALSE we can also assign any probability to the statement. Assume that formula_33 is equivalent to formula_14 being TRUE, and that formula_35 is equivalent to formula_14 being FALSE. It is then easy to see that formula_37 when formula_38 and formula_35. This is because formula_40 so that formula_41 in the last equation. Therefore, the product terms in the first equation always have a zero factor so that formula_37 which is equivalent to formula_13 being FALSE. Hence, the law of total probability combined with Bayes' theorem represents a generalization of \"modus tollens\".\nSubjective logic.\n\"Modus tollens\" represents an instance of the abduction operator in subjective logic expressed as:\nformula_44\nwhere formula_45 denotes the subjective opinion about formula_14, and formula_47 denotes a pair of binomial conditional opinions, as expressed by source formula_48. The parameter formula_49 denotes the base rate (aka. the prior probability) of formula_13. The abduced marginal opinion on formula_13 is denoted formula_52. The conditional opinion formula_53 generalizes the logical statement formula_2, i.e. in addition to assigning TRUE or FALSE the source formula_48 can assign any subjective opinion to the statement. The case where formula_45 is an absolute TRUE opinion is equivalent to source formula_48 saying that formula_14 is TRUE, and the case where formula_45 is an absolute FALSE opinion is equivalent to source formula_48 saying that formula_14 is FALSE. The abduction operator formula_62 of subjective logic produces an absolute FALSE abduced opinion formula_63 when the conditional opinion formula_53 is absolute TRUE and the consequent opinion formula_45 is absolute FALSE. Hence, subjective logic abduction represents a generalization of both \"modus tollens\" and of the Law of total probability combined with Bayes' theorem.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18902", "revid": "4711431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18902", "title": "Mathematician", "text": "Person with an extensive knowledge of mathematics\nA mathematician is someone who uses an extensive knowledge of mathematics in their work, typically to solve mathematical problems. Mathematicians are concerned with numbers, data, quantity, structure, space, models, and change.\nHistory.\nOne of the earliest known mathematicians was Thales of Miletus (c.\u2009624\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009546 BC); he has been hailed as the first true mathematician and the first known individual to whom a mathematical discovery has been attributed. He is credited with the first use of deductive reasoning applied to geometry, by deriving four corollaries to Thales's theorem.\nThe number of known mathematicians grew when Pythagoras of Samos (c.\u2009582\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009507 BC) established the Pythagorean school, whose doctrine it was that mathematics ruled the universe and whose motto was \"All is number\". It was the Pythagoreans who coined the term \"mathematics\", and with whom the study of mathematics for its own sake begins.\nThe first woman mathematician recorded by history was Hypatia of Alexandria (c.\u2009AD 350 \u2013 415). She succeeded her father as librarian at the Great Library and wrote many works on applied mathematics. Because of a political dispute, the Christian community in Alexandria punished her, presuming she was involved, by stripping her naked and scraping off her skin with clamshells (some say roofing tiles).\nScience and mathematics in the Islamic world during the Middle Ages followed various models and modes of funding varied based primarily on scholars. It was extensive patronage and strong intellectual policies implemented by specific rulers that allowed scientific knowledge to develop in many areas. Funding for translation of scientific texts in other languages was ongoing throughout the reign of certain caliphs, and it turned out that certain scholars became experts in the works they translated, and in turn received further support for continuing to develop certain sciences. As these sciences received wider attention from the elite, more scholars were invited and funded to study particular sciences. An example of a translator and mathematician who benefited from this type of support was Al-Khawarizmi. A notable feature of many scholars working under Muslim rule in medieval times is that they were often polymaths. Examples include the work on optics, maths and astronomy of Ibn al-Haytham.\nThe Renaissance brought an increased emphasis on mathematics and science to Europe. During this period of transition from a mainly feudal and ecclesiastical culture to a predominantly secular one, many notable mathematicians had other occupations: Luca Pacioli (founder of accounting); Niccol\u00f2 Fontana Tartaglia (notable engineer and bookkeeper); Gerolamo Cardano (earliest founder of probability and binomial expansion); Robert Recorde (physician) and Fran\u00e7ois Vi\u00e8te (lawyer).\nAs time passed, many mathematicians gravitated towards universities. An emphasis on free thinking and experimentation had begun in Britain's oldest universities beginning in the seventeenth century at Oxford with the scientists Robert Hooke and Robert Boyle, and at Cambridge where Isaac Newton was Lucasian Professor of Mathematics &amp; Physics. Moving into the 19th century, the objective of universities all across Europe evolved from teaching the \"regurgitation of knowledge\" to \"encourag[ing] productive thinking.\" In 1810, Alexander von Humboldt convinced the king of Prussia, Fredrick William III, to build a university in Berlin based on Friedrich Schleiermacher's liberal ideas; the goal was to demonstrate the process of the discovery of knowledge and to teach students to \"take account of fundamental laws of science in all their thinking.\" Thus, seminars and laboratories started to evolve.\nBritish universities of this period adopted some approaches familiar to the Italian and German universities, but as they already enjoyed substantial freedoms and autonomy the changes there had begun with the Age of Enlightenment, the same influences that inspired Humboldt. The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge emphasized the importance of research, arguably more authentically implementing Humboldt's idea of a university than even German universities, which were subject to state authority. Overall, science (including mathematics) became the focus of universities in the 19th and 20th centuries. Students could conduct research in seminars or laboratories and began to produce doctoral theses with more scientific content. According to Humboldt, the mission of the University of Berlin was to pursue scientific knowledge. The German university system fostered professional, bureaucratically regulated scientific research performed in well-equipped laboratories, instead of the kind of research done by private and individual scholars in Great Britain and France. In fact, R\u00fcegg asserts that the German system is responsible for the development of the modern research university because it focused on the idea of \"freedom of scientific research, teaching and study.\"\nRequired education.\nMathematicians usually cover a breadth of topics within mathematics in their undergraduate education, and then proceed to specialize in topics of their own choice at the graduate level. In some universities, a qualifying exam serves to test both the breadth and depth of a student's understanding of mathematics; the students who pass are permitted to work on a doctoral dissertation.\nActivities.\nApplied mathematics.\nMathematicians involved with solving problems with applications in real life are called applied mathematicians. Applied mathematicians are mathematical scientists who, with their specialized knowledge and professional methodology, approach many of the imposing problems presented in related scientific fields. With professional focus on a wide variety of problems, theoretical systems, and localized constructs, applied mathematicians work regularly in the study and formulation of mathematical models. Mathematicians and applied mathematicians are considered to be two of the STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) careers.\nThe discipline of applied mathematics concerns itself with mathematical methods that are typically used in science, engineering, business, and industry; thus, \"applied mathematics\" is a mathematical science with specialized knowledge. The term \"applied mathematics\" also describes the professional specialty in which mathematicians work on problems, often concrete but sometimes abstract. As professionals focused on problem solving, \"applied mathematicians\" look into the \"formulation, study, and use of mathematical models\" in science, engineering, business, and other areas of mathematical practice.\nPure mathematics.\nPure mathematics is mathematics that studies entirely abstract concepts. From the eighteenth century onwards, this was a recognized category of mathematical activity, sometimes characterized as \"speculative mathematics\", and at variance with the trend towards meeting the needs of navigation, astronomy, physics, economics, engineering, and other applications.\nAnother insightful view put forth is that \"pure mathematics is not necessarily applied mathematics\": it is possible to study abstract entities with respect to their intrinsic nature, and not be concerned with how they manifest in the real world. Even though the pure and applied viewpoints are distinct philosophical positions, in practice there is much overlap in the activity of pure and applied mathematicians.\nTo develop accurate models for describing the real world, many applied mathematicians draw on tools and techniques that are often considered to be \"pure\" mathematics. On the other hand, many pure mathematicians draw on natural and social phenomena as inspiration for their abstract research.\nMathematics teaching.\nMany professional mathematicians also engage in the teaching of mathematics. Duties may include:\nConsulting.\nMany careers in mathematics outside of universities involve consulting. For instance, actuaries assemble and analyze data to estimate the probability and likely cost of the occurrence of an event such as death, sickness, injury, disability, or loss of property. Actuaries also address financial questions, including those involving the level of pension contributions required to produce a certain retirement income and the way in which a company should invest resources to maximize its return on investments in light of potential risk. Using their broad knowledge, actuaries help design and price insurance policies, pension plans, and other financial strategies in a manner which will help ensure that the plans are maintained on a sound financial basis.\nAs another example, mathematical finance will derive and extend the mathematical or numerical models without necessarily establishing a link to financial theory, taking observed market prices as input. Mathematical consistency is required, not compatibility with economic theory. Thus, for example, while a financial economist might study the structural reasons why a company may have a certain share price, a financial mathematician may take the share price as a given, and attempt to use stochastic calculus to obtain the corresponding value of derivatives of the stock (\"see: Valuation of options; Financial modeling\").\nOccupations.\nAccording to the Dictionary of Occupational Titles occupations in mathematics include the following.\nPrizes in mathematics.\nThere is no Nobel Prize in mathematics, though sometimes mathematicians have won the Nobel Prize in a different field, such as economics or physics. Prominent prizes in mathematics include the Abel Prize, the Chern Medal, the Fields Medal, the Gauss Prize, the Nemmers Prize, the Balzan Prize, the Crafoord Prize, the Shaw Prize, the Steele Prize, the Wolf Prize, the Schock Prize, and the Nevanlinna Prize.\nThe American Mathematical Society, Association for Women in Mathematics, and other mathematical societies offer several prizes aimed at increasing the representation of women and minorities in the future of mathematics.\nMathematical autobiographies.\nSeveral well known mathematicians have written autobiographies in part to explain to a general audience what it is about mathematics that has made them want to devote their lives to its study. These provide some of the best glimpses into what it means to be a mathematician. The following list contains some works that are not autobiographies, but rather essays on mathematics and mathematicians with strong autobiographical elements.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18903", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18903", "title": "Marine Sciences", "text": ""}
{"id": "18905", "revid": "1271346278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18905", "title": "Armed forces", "text": ""}
{"id": "18906", "revid": "44029228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18906", "title": "Microfluidics", "text": "Interdisciplinary science\nMicrofluidics refers to a system that manipulates a small amount of fluids (10\u22129 to 10\u221218 liters) using small channels with sizes of ten to hundreds of micrometres. It is a multidisciplinary field that involves molecular analysis, molecular biology, and microelectronics. It has practical applications in the design of systems that process low volumes of fluids to achieve multiplexing, automation, and high-throughput screening. Microfluidics emerged in the beginning of the 1980s and is used in the development of inkjet printheads, DNA chips, lab-on-a-chip technology, micro-propulsion, and micro-thermal technologies.\nTypically microfluidic systems transport, mix, separate, or otherwise process fluids. Various applications rely on passive fluid control using capillary forces, in the form of capillary flow modifying elements, akin to flow resistors and flow accelerators. In some applications, external actuation means are additionally used for a directed transport of the media. Examples are rotary drives applying centrifugal forces for the fluid transport on the passive chips. \"Active microfluidics\" refers to the defined manipulation of the working fluid by active (micro) components such as micropumps or microvalves. Micropumps supply fluids in a continuous manner or are used for dosing. Microvalves determine the flow direction or the mode of movement of pumped liquids. Often, processes normally carried out in a lab are miniaturised on a single chip, which enhances efficiency and mobility, and reduces sample and reagent volumes.\nCharacteristics.\nThe behaviour of fluids at the microscale can differ from \"macrofluidic\" behaviour in that factors such as surface tension, energy dissipation, and fluidic resistance start to dominate the system. Microfluidics studies how these behaviours change, and how they can be worked around, or exploited for new uses.\nAt small scales (channel size of around 100 nanometers to 500 micrometers) some unintuitive properties appear. In particular, the Reynolds number (which compares the effect of the momentum of a fluid to the effect of viscosity) can become very low. One consequence is co-flowing fluids do not necessarily mix in the traditional sense, as flow becomes laminar rather than turbulent; molecular transport between them must often be through diffusion.\nHigh specificity of chemical and physical properties (concentration, pH, temperature, shear force, etc.) can also be ensured resulting in more uniform reaction conditions and higher grade products in single and multi-step reactions.\nFlow types.\nMicrofluidic flows need only be constrained by geometrical length scale \u2013 the modalities and methods used to achieve such a geometrical constraint are highly dependent on the targeted application. Traditionally, microfluidic flows have been generated inside closed channels with the channel cross section being in the order of 10 \u03bcm x 10 \u03bcm. Each of these methods has its own associated techniques to maintain robust fluid flow which have matured over several years.\nOpen microchannels.\nThe behavior of fluids and their control in open microchannels came into focus around 2005 and applied in air-to-liquid sample collection and chromatography. In open microfluidics, at least one boundary of the system is removed, exposing the fluid to air or another interface (i.e. liquid). Advantages of open microfluidics include accessibility to the flowing liquid for intervention, larger liquid-gas surface area, and minimized bubble formation. Another advantage of open microfluidics is the ability to integrate open systems with surface-tension driven fluid flow, which eliminates the need for external pumping methods such as peristaltic or syringe pumps. Open microfluidic devices are also easy and inexpensive to fabricate by milling, thermoforming, and hot embossing. In addition, open microfluidics eliminates the need to glue or bond a cover for devices, which could be detrimental to capillary flows. Examples of open microfluidics include open-channel microfluidics, rail-based microfluidics, paper-based, and thread-based microfluidics. Disadvantages to open systems include susceptibility to evaporation, contamination, and limited flow rate.\nContinuous flow.\nContinuous flow microfluidics rely on the control of a steady state liquid flow through narrow channels or porous media predominantly by accelerating or hindering fluid flow in capillary elements. In paper based microfluidics, capillary elements can be achieved through the simple variation of section geometry. In general, the actuation of liquid flow is implemented either by external pressure sources, external mechanical pumps, integrated mechanical micropumps, or by combinations of capillary forces and electrokinetic mechanisms. Continuous-flow microfluidic operation is the mainstream approach because it is easy to implement and less sensitive to protein fouling problems. Continuous-flow devices are adequate for many well-defined and simple biochemical applications, and for certain tasks such as chemical separation, but they are less suitable for tasks requiring a high degree of flexibility or fluid manipulations. These closed-channel systems are inherently difficult to integrate and scale because the parameters that govern flow field vary along the flow path making the fluid flow at any one location dependent on the properties of the entire system. Permanently etched microstructures also lead to limited reconfigurability and poor fault tolerance capability. \nProcess monitoring capabilities in continuous-flow systems can be achieved with highly sensitive microfluidic flow sensors based on MEMS technology, which offers resolutions down to the nanoliter range.\nDroplet-based.\nDroplet-based microfluidics is differs from continuous microfluidics; droplet-based microfluidics manipulates discrete volumes of fluids in immiscible phases with low Reynolds number and laminar flow regimes. Interest in droplet-based microfluidics systems has been growing substantially in past decades. Microdroplets allow for handling miniature volumes (\u03bcL to fL) of fluids conveniently, provide better mixing, encapsulation, sorting, and sensing, and suit high throughput experiments. Exploiting the benefits of droplet-based microfluidics efficiently requires a deep understanding of droplet generation to perform various logical operations such as droplet manipulation, droplet sorting, droplet merging, and droplet breakup.\nDigital.\nAlternatives to the above closed-channel continuous-flow systems include novel open structures, where discrete, independently controllable droplets\nare manipulated on a substrate using electrowetting. Following the analogy of digital microelectronics, this approach is referred to as digital microfluidics. Le Pesant et al. pioneered the use of electrocapillary forces to move droplets on a digital track. The \"fluid transistor\" pioneered by Cytonix also played a role. The technology was subsequently commercialised by Duke University. By using discrete unit-volume droplets, a microfluidic function can be reduced to a set of repeated basic operations, i.e., moving one unit of fluid over one unit of distance. This \"digitisation\" method facilitates the use of a hierarchical and cell-based approach for microfluidic biochip design. Therefore, digital microfluidics offers a flexible and scalable system architecture as well as high fault-tolerance capability. Moreover, because each droplet can be controlled independently, these systems also have dynamic reconfigurability, whereby groups of unit cells in a microfluidic array can be reconfigured to change their functionality during the concurrent execution of a set of bioassays. Although droplets are manipulated in confined microfluidic channels, since the control on droplets is not independent, it should not be confused as \"digital microfluidics\". One common actuation method for digital microfluidics is electrowetting-on-dielectric (EWOD). Many lab-on-a-chip applications have been demonstrated within the digital microfluidics paradigm using electrowetting. \nPaper-based.\nPaper-based microfluidic devices are proposed to provide portable, cheap, and user-friendly medical diagnostic systems. \nPaper based microfluidics rely on the phenomenon of capillary penetration in porous media. To tune fluid penetration in porous substrates such as paper in two and three dimensions, the pore structure, wettability and geometry of the microfluidic devices can be controlled while the viscosity and evaporation rate of the liquid play a further significant role. Many such devices feature hydrophobic barriers on hydrophilic paper that passively transport aqueous solutions to outlets where biological reactions take place. Paper-based microfluidics are considered as portable point-of-care biosensors used in a remote setting where advanced medical diagnostic tools are not accessible. Current applications include portable glucose detection and environmental testing, with hopes of reaching areas that lack advanced medical diagnostic tools.\nParticle detection.\nOne potential application area involves particle detection in fluids. Particle detection of small fluid-borne particles down to about 1 \u03bcm in diameter is typically achieved using a Coulter counter, in which electrical signals are generated when a weakly-conducting fluid such as in saline water is passed through a small (~100 \u03bcm diameter) pore, so that an electrical signal is generated that is directly proportional to the ratio of the particle volume to the pore volume. The physics behind this is relatively simple, described in a classic paper by DeBlois and Bean, and the implementation first described in Coulter's original patent. This is the method used to e.g. size and count erythrocytes (red blood cells) as well as leukocytes (white blood cells) for standard blood analysis. The generic term for this method is resistive pulse sensing (RPS); Coulter counting is a trademark term. However, the RPS method does not work well for particles below 1 \u03bcm diameter, as the signal-to-noise ratio falls below the reliably detectable limit, set mostly by the size of the pore in which the analyte passes and the input noise of the first-stage amplifier.\nThe limit on the pore size in traditional RPS Coulter counters is set by the method used to make the pores, which while a trade secret, most likely uses traditional mechanical methods. This is where microfluidics can have an impact: The lithography-based production of microfluidic devices, or more likely the production of reusable molds for making microfluidic devices using a molding process, is limited to sizes much smaller than traditional machining. Critical dimensions down to 1 \u03bcm are easily fabricated, and with a bit more effort and expense, feature sizes below 100\u00a0nm can be patterned reliably as well. This enables the inexpensive production of pores integrated in a microfluidic circuit where the pore diameters can reach sizes of order 100\u00a0nm, with a concomitant reduction in the minimum particle diameters by several orders of magnitude.\nAs a result, there has been some university-based development of microfluidic particle counting and sizing with the accompanying commercialization of this technology. This method has been termed microfluidic resistive pulse sensing (MRPS).\nMagnetophoresis.\nOne application for microfluidic devices is the separation and sorting of different fluids or cell types. Microfluidic devices have been integrated with magnetophoresis: the migration of particles by a magnetic field. This can be accomplished by sending a fluid containing at least one magnetic component through a microfluidic channel that has a magnet positioned along the length of the channel. This creates a magnetic field inside the microfluidic channel which draws magnetically active substances towards it, effectively separating the magnetic and non-magnetic components of the fluid. This technique can be readily utilized in industrial settings where the fluid at hand already contains magnetically active material. For example, a handful of metallic impurities can find their way into certain consumable liquids, namely milk and other dairy products. Conveniently, in the case of milk, many of these metal contaminants exhibit paramagnetism. Therefore, before packaging, milk can be flowed through channels with magnetic gradients as a means of purifying out the metal contaminants.\ncell separations are of interest in microfluidics. This is accomplished. First, a paramagnetic substance (usually micro/nanoparticles or a paramagnetic fluid) needs to be functionalized to target the cell type of interest. This can be accomplished by identifying a transmembranal protein unique to the cell type of interest and subsequently functionalizing magnetic particles with the complementary antigen or antibody. Once the magnetic particles are functionalized, they are dispersed in a cell mixture where they bind to only the cells of interest. The resulting cell/particle mixture can then be flowed through a microfluidic device with a magnetic field to separate the targeted cells from the rest.\nConversely, microfluidic-assisted magnetophoresis may be used to facilitate efficient mixing within microdroplets or plugs. To accomplish this, microdroplets are injected with paramagnetic nanoparticles and are flowed through a straight channel which passes through rapidly alternating magnetic fields. This causes the magnetic particles to be quickly pushed from side to side within the droplet and results in the mixing of the microdroplet contents. This eliminates the need for tedious engineering considerations that are necessary for traditional, channel-based droplet mixing. Other research has also shown that the label-free separation of cells may be possible by suspending cells in a paramagnetic fluid and taking advantage of the magneto-Archimedes effect. While this does eliminate the complexity of particle functionalization, more research is needed to fully understand the magneto-Archimedes phenomenon and how it can be used to this end. This is not an exhaustive list of the various applications of microfluidic-assisted magnetophoresis; the above examples merely highlight the versatility of this separation technique in both current and future applications.\nApplications.\nMicrofluidic structures include micropneumatic systems, i.e. microsystems for the handling of off-chip fluids (liquid pumps, gas valves, etc.), and microfluidic structures for the on-chip handling of nanoliter (nl) and picoliter (pl) volumes. To date, the most successful commercial application of microfluidics is the inkjet printhead. Additionally, microfluidic manufacturing advances mean that makers can produce the devices in low-cost plastics such as polymethymethacrylate (PMMA), polystyrene, cyclic olefin polymer (COP) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and automatically verify part quality.\nAdvances in microfluidics technology promise to improve molecular biology procedures for enzymatic analysis (e.g., glucose and lactate assays), DNA analysis (e.g., polymerase chain reaction and high-throughput sequencing), proteomics, and in chemical synthesis. Microfluidic biochips integrate assay operations such as detection, with sample pre-treatment and sample preparation.\nA promising application area for biochips is clinical pathology, especially the point-of-care diagnosis of diseases. In addition, microfluidics-based devices, capable of continuous sampling and real-time testing of air/water samples for biochemical toxins and other dangerous pathogens, can serve as an always-on \"bio-smoke alarm\" for early warning.\nMicrofluidic technology has provide tools for biologists to control the cellular environment. Potential advantages of this technology for microbiology are listed below:\nSome of these areas are further elaborated in the sections below:\nDNA chips.\nEarly biochips were based on the idea of a DNA microarray, e.g., the GeneChip DNAarray from Affymetrix, which is a piece of glass, plastic or silicon substrate, on which pieces of DNA (probes) are affixed in a microscopic array. Similar to a DNA microarray, a protein array is a miniature array where a multitude of different capture agents, most frequently monoclonal antibodies, are deposited on a chip surface; they are used to determine the presence and/or amount of proteins in biological samples, e.g., blood. A drawback of DNA and protein arrays is that they are neither reconfigurable nor scalable after manufacture. Digital microfluidics has been described as a means for carrying out Digital PCR.\nMolecular biology.\nIn addition to microarrays, biochips have been designed for two-dimensional electrophoresis, transcriptome analysis, and PCR amplification. Other applications include various electrophoresis and liquid chromatography applications for proteins and DNA, cell separation, in particular, blood cell separation, protein analysis, cell manipulation and analysis including cell viability analysis and microorganism capturing.\nEvolutionary biology.\nBy combining microfluidics with landscape ecology and nanofluidics, a nano/micro fabricated fluidic landscape can be constructed by building local patches of bacterial habitat and connecting them by dispersal corridors. The resulting landscapes can be used as physical implementations of an adaptive landscape, by generating a spatial mosaic of patches of opportunity distributed in space and time. The patchy nature of these fluidic landscapes allows for the study of adapting bacterial cells in a metapopulation system. The evolutionary ecology of these bacterial systems in these synthetic ecosystems allows for using biophysics to address questions in evolutionary biology.\nCell behavior.\nThe ability to create precise and carefully controlled chemoattractant gradients makes microfluidics the ideal tool to study motility, chemotaxis and the ability to evolve / develop resistance to antibiotics in small populations of microorganisms and in a short period of time. These microorganisms including bacteria and the broad range of organisms that form the marine microbial loop, responsible for regulating much of the oceans' biogeochemistry.\nMicrofluidics has also greatly aided the study of durotaxis by facilitating the creation of durotactic (stiffness) gradients.\nCellular biophysics.\nBy rectifying the motion of individual swimming bacteria, microfluidic structures can be used to extract mechanical motion from a population of motile bacterial cells. This way, bacteria-powered rotors can be built.\nOptics.\nThe merger of microfluidics and optics is typical known as optofluidics. Examples of optofluidic devices are tunable microlens arrays and optofluidic microscopes.\nMicrofluidic flow enables fast sample throughput, automated imaging of large sample populations, as well as 3D capabilities, or superresolution.\nPhotonics Lab on a Chip.\nDue to the increase in safety concerns and operating costs of common analytic methods (ICP-MS, ICP-AAS, and ICP-OES), the Photonics Lab on a Chip (PhLOC) is becoming an increasingly popular tool for the analysis of actinides and nitrates in spent nuclear waste. The PhLOC is based on the simultaneous application of Raman and UV-Vis-NIR spectroscopy, which allows for the analysis of more complex mixtures which contain several actinides at different oxidation states. Measurements made with these methods have been validated at the bulk level for industrial tests, and are observed to have a much lower variance at the micro-scale. This approach has been found to have molar extinction coefficients (UV-Vis) in line with known literature values over a comparatively large concentration span for 150 \u03bcL via elongation of the measurement channel, and obeys Beer's Law at the micro-scale for U(IV). Through the development of a spectrophotometric approach to analyzing spent fuel, an on-line method for measurement of reactant quantities is created, increasing the rate at which samples can be analyzed and thus decreasing the size of deviations detectable within reprocessing.\nThrough the application of the PhLOC, flexibility and safety of operational methods are increased. Since the analysis of spent nuclear fuel involves extremely harsh conditions, the application of disposable and rapidly produced devices (Based on castable and/or engravable materials such as PDMS, PMMA, and glass) is advantageous, although material integrity must be considered under specific harsh conditions. Through the usage of fiber optic coupling, the device can be isolated from instrumentation, preventing irradiative damage and minimizing the exposure of lab personnel to potentially harmful radiation, something not possible on the lab scale nor with the previous standard of analysis. The shrinkage of the device also allows for lower amounts of analyte to be used, decreasing the amount of waste generated and exposure to hazardous materials.\nExpansion of the PhLOC to miniaturize research of the full nuclear fuel cycle is currently being evaluated, with steps of the PUREX process successfully being demonstrated at the micro-scale. Likewise, the microfluidic technology developed for the analysis of spent nuclear fuel is predicted to expand horizontally to analysis of other actinide, lanthanides, and transition metals with little to no modification.\nHigh Performance Liquid Chromatography.\nHigh Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) in the field of microfluidics comes in two different forms. Early designs included running liquid through the HPLC column then transferring the eluted liquid to microfluidic chips and attaching HPLC columns to the microfluidic chip directly. The early methods had the advantage of easier detection from certain machines like those that measure fluorescence. HPLC columns have been integrated into microfluidic chips. The main advantage of integrating HPLC columns into microfluidic devices is the smaller form factor that can be achieved, which allows for additional features to be combined within one microfluidic chip. Integrated chips can also be fabricated from multiple different materials, including glass and polyimide which are quite different from the standard material of PDMS used in many different droplet-based microfluidic devices. This is an important feature because different applications of HPLC microfluidic chips may call for different pressures. PDMS fails in comparison for high-pressure uses compared to glass and polyimide. High versatility of HPLC integration ensures robustness by avoiding connections and fittings between the column and chip. The ability to build off said designs in the future allows the field of microfluidics to continue expanding its potential applications.\nThe potential applications surrounding integrated HPLC columns within microfluidic devices have proven expansive over the last 10\u201315 years. The integration of such columns allows for experiments to be run where materials were in low availability or very expensive, like in biological analysis of proteins. This reduction in reagent volumes allows for new experiments like single-cell protein analysis, which due to size limitations of prior devices, previously came with great difficulty. The coupling of HPLC-chip devices with other spectrometry methods like mass-spectrometry allow for enhanced confidence in identification of desired species, like proteins. Microfluidic chips have also been created with internal delay-lines that allow for gradient generation to further improve HPLC, which can reduce the need for further separations. Some other practical applications of integrated HPLC chips include the determination of drug presence in a person through their hair and the labeling of peptides through reverse phase liquid chromatography.\nAcoustic droplet ejection.\nAcoustic droplet ejection (ADE) uses a pulse of ultrasound to move low volumes of fluids (typically nanoliters or picoliters) without any physical contact. This technology focuses acoustic energy into a fluid sample to eject droplets as small as a millionth of a millionth of a litre (picoliter = 10\u221212 litre). ADE technology is a very gentle process, and it can be used to transfer proteins, high molecular weight DNA and live cells without damage or loss of viability. This feature makes the technology suitable for a wide variety of applications including proteomics and cell-based assays.\nFuel cells.\nMicrofluidic fuel cells can use laminar flow to separate the fuel and its oxidant to control the interaction of the two fluids without the physical barrier that conventional fuel cells require.\nAstrobiology.\nTo understand the prospects for life to exist elsewhere in the universe, astrobiologists are interested in measuring the chemical composition of extraplanetary bodies. Because of their small size and wide-ranging functionality, microfluidic devices are uniquely suited for these remote sample analyses. From an extraterrestrial sample, the organic content can be assessed using microchip capillary electrophoresis and selective fluorescent dyes. These devices are capable of detecting amino acids, peptides, fatty acids, and simple aldehydes, ketones, and thiols. These analyses coupled together could allow powerful detection of the key components of life, and hopefully inform our search for functioning extraterrestrial life.\nFood science.\nMicrofluidic techniques such as droplet microfluidics, paper microfluidics, and lab-on-a-chip are used in the realm of food science in a variety of categories. Research in nutrition, food processing, and food safety benefit from microfluidic technique because experiments can be done with less reagents.\nFood processing requires the ability to enable shelf stability in foods, such as emulsions or additions of preservatives. Techniques such as droplet microfluidics are used to create emulsions that are more controlled and complex than those created by traditional homogenization due to the precision of droplets that is achievable. Using microfluidics for emulsions is also more energy efficient compared to homogenization in which \"only 5% of the supplied energy is used to generate the emulsion, with the rest dissipated as heat\" . Although these methods have benefits, they currently lack the ability to be produced at large scale that is needed for commercialization. Microfluidics are also used in research as they allow for innovation in food chemistry and food processing. An example in food engineering research is a novel micro-3D-printed device fabricated to research production of droplets for potential food processing industry use, particularly in work with enhancing emulsions.\nPaper and droplet microfluidics allow for devices that can detect small amounts of unwanted bacteria or chemicals, making them useful in food safety and analysis. Paper-based microfluidic devices are often referred to as microfluidic paper-based analytical devices (\u03bcPADs) and can detect such things as nitrate, preservatives, or antibiotics in meat by a colorimetric reaction that can be detected with a smartphone. These methods are being researched because they use less reactants, space, and time compared to traditional techniques such as liquid chromatography. \u03bcPADs also make home detection tests possible, which is of interest to those with allergies and intolerances. In addition to paper-based methods, research demonstrates droplet-based microfluidics shows promise in drastically shortening the time necessary to confirm viable bacterial contamination in agricultural waters in the domestic and international food industry.\nPersonalized cancer treatment.\nPersonalized cancer treatment is a tuned method based on the patient's diagnosis and background. Microfluidic technology offers sensitive detection with higher throughput, as well as reduced time and costs. For personalized cancer treatment, tumor composition and drug sensitivities are very important.\nA patient's drug response can be predicted based on the status of biomarkers, or the severity and progression of the disease can be predicted based on the atypical presence of specific cells. Drop-qPCR is a droplet microfluidic technology in which droplets are transported in a reusable capillary and alternately flow through two areas maintained at different constant temperatures and fluorescence detection. It can be efficient with a low contamination risk to detect Her2. A digital droplet\u2010based PCR method can be used to detect the KRAS mutations with TaqMan probes, to enhance detection of the mutative gene ratio. In addition, accurate prediction of postoperative disease progression in breast\u00a0or prostate cancer patients is essential for determining post-surgery treatment. A simple microfluidic chamber, coated with a carefully formulated extracellular matrix mixture is used for cells obtained from tumor biopsy after 72 hours of growth and a thorough evaluation of cells by imaging.\nMicrofluidics is also suitable for circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and non-CTCs liquid biopsy analysis. Beads conjugate to anti\u2010epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) antibodies for positive selection in the CTCs isolation chip (iCHIP). CTCs can also be detected by using the acidification of the tumor microenvironment and the difference in membrane capacitance. CTCs are isolated from blood by a microfluidic device, and are cultured on-chip, which can be a method to capture more biological information in a single analysis. For example, it can be used to test the cell survival rate of 40 different drugs or drug combinations. Tumor\u2010derived extracellular vesicles can be isolated from urine and detected by an integrated double\u2010filtration microfluidic device; they also can be isolated from blood and detected by electrochemical sensing method with a two\u2010level amplification enzymatic assay.\nTumor materials can directly be used for detection through microfluidic devices. To screen primary cells for drugs, it is often necessary to distinguish cancerous cells from non-cancerous cells. A microfluidic chip based on the capacity of cells to pass small constrictions can sort the cell types, metastases. Droplet\u2010based microfluidic devices have the potential to screen different drugs or combinations of drugs, directly on the primary tumor sample with high accuracy. To improve this strategy, the microfluidic program with a sequential manner of drug cocktails, coupled with fluorescent barcodes, is more efficient. Another advanced strategy is detecting growth rates of single-cell by using suspended microchannel resonators, which can predict drug sensitivities of rare CTCs.\nMicrofluidics devices also can simulate the tumor microenvironment, to help to test anticancer drugs. Microfluidic devices with 2D or 3D cell cultures can be used to analyze spheroids for different cancer systems (such as lung cancer and ovarian cancer), and are essential for multiple anti-cancer drugs and toxicity tests. This strategy can be improved by increasing the throughput and production of spheroids. For example, one droplet-based microfluidic device for 3D cell culture produces 500 spheroids per chip. These spheroids can be cultured longer in different surroundings to analyze and monitor. The other advanced technology is organs\u2010on\u2010a\u2010chip, and it can be used to simulate several organs to determine the drug metabolism and activity based on vessels mimicking, as well as mimic pH, oxygen... to analyze the relationship between drugs and human organ surroundings.\nOne strategy relevant to single-cell chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChiP)\u2010Sequencing is droplets, which operates by combining droplet\u2010based single cell RNA sequencing with DNA\u2010barcoded antibodies, possibly to explore the tumor heterogeneity by the genotype and phenotype to select the personalized anti-cancer drugs and prevent the cancer relapse.\nEnvironmental Pollution.\nOther than medical and biological applications, microfluidics has been used for pollution detection and control. Although microfluidics is exclusively used for micron-sized particles, a novel lab-on-a-chip that integrates nano-sized particle aggregation with spiral inertial microfluidics for rapid detection of nanoplastics and very small microplastics from the environment.\nCapillary electrophoresis.\nOne significant advancement in the field is the development of integrated capillary electrophoresis (CE) systems on microchips, as demonstrated by Z. Hugh Fan and D. Jed. Harrison. They created a planar glass chip incorporating a sample injector and separation channels using micromachining techniques. This setup allowed for the rapid separation of amino acids in just a few seconds, achieving high separation efficiencies with up to 6800 theoretical plates. The use of high electric fields, possible due to the thermal mass and conductivity of glass, minimized Joule heating effects, making the system highly efficient and fast. Such innovations highlight the potential of microfluidic devices in analytical chemistry, particularly in applications requiring quick and precise analyses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18908", "revid": "13974845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18908", "title": "Mersenne prime", "text": "Prime number of the form 2^n \u2013 1\nIn mathematics, a Mersenne prime is a prime number that is one less than a power of two. That is, it is a prime number of the form \"Mn\" \n 2\"n\" \u2212 1 for some integer \"n\". They are named after Marin Mersenne, a French Minim friar, who studied them in the early 17th century. If \"n\" is a composite number then so is 2\"n\" \u2212 1. Therefore, an equivalent definition of the Mersenne primes is that they are the prime numbers of the form \"Mp\" \n 2\"p\" \u2212 1 for some prime \"p\".\nThe exponents \"n\" which give Mersenne primes are 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 17, 19, 31,\u00a0... (sequence in the OEIS) and the resulting Mersenne primes are 3, 7, 31, 127, 8191, 131071, 524287, 2147483647,\u00a0... (sequence in the OEIS).\nNumbers of the form \"Mn\" \n 2\"n\" \u2212 1 without the primality requirement may be called Mersenne numbers. Sometimes, however, Mersenne numbers are defined to have the additional requirement that \"n\" should be prime.\nThe smallest composite Mersenne number with prime exponent \"n\" is 211 \u2212 1 \n 2047 \n 23 \u00d7 89.\nMersenne primes were studied in antiquity because of their close connection to perfect numbers: the Euclid\u2013Euler theorem asserts a one-to-one correspondence between even perfect numbers and Mersenne primes. Many of the largest known primes are Mersenne primes because Mersenne numbers are easier to check for primality.\nAs of 2025http://, 52 Mersenne primes are known. The largest known prime number, 2136,279,841 \u2212 1, is a Mersenne prime. Since 1997, all newly found Mersenne primes have been discovered by the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search, a distributed computing project. In December 2020, a major milestone in the project was passed after all exponents below 100 million were checked at least once.\nAbout Mersenne primes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in mathematics\nAre there infinitely many Mersenne primes?\nMore unsolved problems in mathematics\nMany fundamental questions about Mersenne primes remain unresolved. It is not even known whether the set of Mersenne primes is finite or infinite.\nThe Lenstra\u2013Pomerance\u2013Wagstaff conjecture claims that there are infinitely many Mersenne primes and predicts their order of growth and frequency: For every number n, there should on average be about formula_1 primes p with n decimal digits for which formula_2 is prime. Here, \u03b3 is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant.\nIt is also not known whether infinitely many Mersenne numbers with prime exponents are composite, although this would follow from widely believed conjectures about prime numbers; for example, from the infinitude of Sophie Germain primes congruent to 3 (mod 4). For these primes p, 2\"p\" + 1 (which is also prime) will divide Mp, for example, 23 | \"M\"11, 47 | \"M\"23, 167 | \"M\"83, 263 | \"M\"131, 359 | \"M\"179, 383 | \"M\"191, 479 | \"M\"239, and 503 | \"M\"251 (sequence in the OEIS). For these primes p, 2\"p\" + 1 is congruent to 7 mod 8, so 2 is a quadratic residue mod 2\"p\" + 1, and the multiplicative order of 2 mod 2\"p\" + 1 must divide formula_3. Since p is a prime, it must be p or 1. However, it cannot be 1 since formula_4 and 1 has no prime factors, so it must be p. Hence, 2\"p\" + 1 divides formula_5 and formula_6 cannot be prime.\nThe first four Mersenne primes are \"M\"2 = 3, \"M\"3 = 7, \"M\"5 = 31 and \"M\"7 = 127 and because the first Mersenne prime starts at \"M\"2, all Mersenne primes are congruent to 3 (mod 4). Other than \"M\"0 = 0 and \"M\"1 = 1, all other Mersenne numbers are also congruent to 3 (mod 4). Consequently, in the prime factorization of a Mersenne number (\u00a0\u2265 \"M\"2\u00a0) there must be at least one prime factor congruent to 3 (mod 4).\nA basic theorem about Mersenne numbers states that if Mp is prime, then the exponent \"p\" must also be prime. This follows from the identity\nformula_7\nThis rules out primality for Mersenne numbers with a composite exponent, such as \"M\"4 = 24 \u2212 1 = 15 = 3 \u00d7 5 = (22 \u2212 1) \u00d7 (1 + 22).\nThough the above examples might suggest that Mp is prime for all primes p, this is not the case, and the smallest counterexample is the Mersenne number\n \"M\"11 = 211 \u2212 1 = 2047 = 23 \u00d7 89.\nThe evidence at hand suggests that a randomly selected Mersenne number is much more likely to be prime than an arbitrary randomly selected odd integer of similar size. Nonetheless, prime values of Mp appear to grow increasingly sparse as p increases. For example, eight of the first 11 primes p give rise to a Mersenne prime Mp (the correct terms on Mersenne's original list), while Mp is prime for only 43 of the first two million prime numbers (up to 32,452,843).\nSince Mersenne numbers grow very rapidly, the search for Mersenne primes is a difficult task, even though there is a simple efficient test to determine whether a given Mersenne number is prime: the Lucas\u2013Lehmer primality test (LLT), which makes it much easier to test the primality of Mersenne numbers than that of most other numbers of the same size. The search for the largest known prime has somewhat of a cult following. Consequently, a large amount of computer power has been expended searching for new Mersenne primes, much of which is now done using distributed computing.\nArithmetic modulo a Mersenne number is particularly efficient on a binary computer, making them popular choices when a prime modulus is desired, such as the Park\u2013Miller random number generator. To find a primitive polynomial of Mersenne number order requires knowing the factorization of that number, so Mersenne primes allow one to find primitive polynomials of very high order. Such primitive trinomials are used in pseudorandom number generators with very large periods such as the Mersenne twister, generalized shift register and Lagged Fibonacci generators.\nPerfect numbers.\nMersenne primes \"M\"\"p\" are closely connected to perfect numbers. In the 4th century BC, Euclid proved that if 2\"p\" \u2212 1 is prime, then 2\"p\" \u2212 1(2\"p\" \u2212 1) is a perfect number. In the 18th century, Leonhard Euler proved that, conversely, all even perfect numbers have this form. This is known as the Euclid\u2013Euler theorem. It is unknown whether there are any odd perfect numbers.\nHistory.\nMersenne primes take their name from the 17th-century French scholar Marin Mersenne, who compiled what was supposed to be a list of Mersenne primes with exponents up to 257. The exponents listed by Mersenne in 1644 were as follows:\n2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 17, 19, 31, 67, 127, 257.\nHis list replicated the known primes of his time with exponents up to 19. His next entry, 31, was correct, but the list then became largely incorrect, as Mersenne mistakenly included \"M\"67 and \"M\"257 (which are composite) and omitted \"M\"61, \"M\"89, and \"M\"107 (which are prime). Mersenne gave little indication of how he came up with his list.\n\u00c9douard Lucas proved in 1876 that \"M\"127 is indeed prime, as Mersenne claimed. This was the largest known prime number for 75 years until 1951, when Aim\u00e9 Ferrier found a larger prime, formula_8, using a desk calculating machine. \"M\"61 was determined to be prime in 1883 by Ivan Mikheevich Pervushin, though Mersenne claimed it was composite, and for this reason it is sometimes called Pervushin's number. This was the second-largest known prime number, and it remained so until 1911. Lucas had shown another error in Mersenne's list in 1876 by demonstrating that \"M\"67 was composite without finding a factor. No factor was found until a famous talk by Frank Nelson Cole in 1903. Without speaking a word, he went to a blackboard and raised 2 to the 67th power, then subtracted one, resulting in the number 147,573,952,589,676,412,927. On the other side of the board, he multiplied 193,707,721 \u00d7 761,838,257,287 and got the same number, then returned to his seat (to applause) without speaking. He later said that the result had taken him \"three years of Sundays\" to find. A correct list of all Mersenne primes in this number range was completed and rigorously verified only about three centuries after Mersenne published his list.\nSearching for Mersenne primes.\nFast algorithms for finding Mersenne primes are available, and as of \u00a02024[ [update]], the seven largest known prime numbers are Mersenne primes.\nThe first four Mersenne primes \"M\"2 \n 3, \"M\"3 \n 7, \"M\"5 \n 31 and \"M\"7 \n 127 were known in antiquity. The fifth, \"M\"13 \n 8191, was discovered anonymously before 1461; the next two (\"M\"17 and \"M\"19) were found by Pietro Cataldi in 1588. After nearly two centuries, \"M\"31 was verified to be prime by Leonhard Euler in 1772. The next (in historical, not numerical order) was \"M\"127, found by \u00c9douard Lucas in 1876, then \"M\"61 by Ivan Mikheevich Pervushin in 1883. Two more (\"M\"89 and \"M\"107) were found early in the 20th century, by R. E. Powers in 1911 and 1914, respectively.\nThe most efficient method presently known for testing the primality of Mersenne numbers is the Lucas\u2013Lehmer primality test. Specifically, it can be shown that for prime \"p\" &gt; 2, \"Mp\" \n 2\"p\" \u2212 1 is prime if and only if \"Mp\" divides \"S\"\"p\" \u2212 2, where \"S\"0 \n 4 and \"Sk\" \n (\"S\"\"k\" \u2212 1)2 \u2212 2 for \"k\" &gt; 0.\nDuring the era of manual calculation, all previously untested exponents up to and including 257 were tested with the Lucas\u2013Lehmer test and found to be composite. A notable contribution was made by retired Yale physics professor Horace Scudder Uhler, who did the calculations for exponents 157, 167, 193, 199, 227, and 229. Unfortunately for those investigators, the interval they were testing contains the largest known relative gap between Mersenne primes: the next Mersenne prime exponent, 521, would turn out to be more than four times as large as the previous record of 127.\nThe search for Mersenne primes was revolutionized by the introduction of the electronic digital computer. Alan Turing searched for them on the Manchester Mark 1 in 1949, but the first successful identification of a Mersenne prime, \"M\"521, by this means was achieved at 10:00 pm on January 30, 1952, using the U.S. National Bureau of Standards Western Automatic Computer (SWAC) at the Institute for Numerical Analysis at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), under the direction of D. H. Lehmer, with a computer search program written and run by Prof. R. M. Robinson. It was the first Mersenne prime to be identified in thirty-eight years; the next one, \"M\"607, was found by the computer a little less than two hours later. Three more\u00a0\u2014 \"M\"1279, \"M\"2203, and \"M\"2281\u00a0\u2014 were found by the same program in the next several months. \"M\"4,423 was the first prime discovered with more than 1000 digits, \"M\"44,497 was the first with more than 10,000, and \"M\"6,972,593 was the first with more than a million. In general, the number of digits in the decimal representation of \"Mn\" equals \u230a\"n\" \u00d7 log102\u230b + 1, where \u230a\"x\"\u230b denotes the floor function (or equivalently \u230alog10\"Mn\"\u230b + 1).\nIn September 2008, mathematicians at UCLA participating in the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search (GIMPS) won part of a $100,000 prize from the Electronic Frontier Foundation for their discovery of a very nearly 13-million-digit Mersenne prime. The prize, finally confirmed in October 2009, is for the first known prime with at least 10 million digits. The prime was found on a Dell OptiPlex 745 on August 23, 2008. This was the eighth Mersenne prime discovered at UCLA.\nOn April 12, 2009, a GIMPS server log reported that a 47th Mersenne prime had possibly been found. The find was first noticed on June 4, 2009, and verified a week later. The prime is 242,643,801 \u2212 1. Although it is chronologically the 47th Mersenne prime to be discovered, it is smaller than the largest known at the time, which was the 45th to be discovered.\nOn January 25, 2013, Curtis Cooper, a mathematician at the University of Central Missouri, discovered a 48th Mersenne prime, 257,885,161 \u2212 1 (a number with 17,425,170 digits), as a result of a search executed by a GIMPS server network.\nOn January 19, 2016, Cooper published his discovery of a 49th Mersenne prime, 274,207,281 \u2212 1 (a number with 22,338,618 digits), as a result of a search executed by a GIMPS server network. This was the fourth Mersenne prime discovered by Cooper and his team in the past ten years.\nOn September 2, 2016, the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search finished verifying all tests below \"M\"37,156,667, thus officially confirming its position as the 45th Mersenne prime.\nOn January 3, 2018, it was announced that Jonathan Pace, a 51-year-old electrical engineer living in Germantown, Tennessee, had found a 50th Mersenne prime, 277,232,917 \u2212 1 (a number with 23,249,425 digits), as a result of a search executed by a GIMPS server network. The discovery was made by a computer in the offices of a church in the same town.\nOn December 21, 2018, it was announced that The Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search (GIMPS) discovered a new prime number, 282,589,933 \u2212 1, having 24,862,048 digits. A computer volunteered by Patrick Laroche from Ocala, Florida made the find on December 7, 2018.\nIn late 2020, GIMPS began using a new technique to rule out potential Mersenne primes called the Probable prime (PRP) test, based on development from Robert Gerbicz in 2017, and a simple way to verify tests developed by Krzysztof Pietrzak in 2018. Due to the low error rate and ease of proof, this nearly halved the computing time to rule out potential primes over the Lucas-Lehmer test (as two users would no longer have to perform the same test to confirm the other's result), although exponents passing the PRP test still require one to confirm their primality.\nOn October 12, 2024, a user named Luke Durant from San Jose, California, found the current largest known Mersenne prime, 2136,279,841 \u2212 1, having 41,024,320 digits. This marks the first Mersenne prime with an exponent surpassing 8 digits. This was announced on October 21, 2024.\nTheorems about Mersenne numbers.\nMersenne numbers are 0, 1, 3, 7, 15, 31, 63,\u00a0... (sequence in the OEIS).\n 2 or \"p\" \n 1.\n \"ap\" \u2212 1 or \"a\" \u2212 1 \n \u00b11. In the former case, \"a\" \n \"ap\", hence \"a\" \n 0, 1 (which is a contradiction, as neither \u22121 nor 0 is prime) or \"p\" \n 1. In the latter case, \"a\" \n 2 or \"a\" \n 0. If \"a\" \n 0, however, 0\"p\" \u2212 1 \n 0 \u2212 1 \n \u22121 which is not prime. Therefore, \"a\" \n 2.\n \"ab\" with a and \"b\" &gt; 1. Then 2\"p\" \u2212 1 \n 2\"ab\" \u2212 1 \n (2\"a\")\"b\" \u2212 1 \n (2\"a\" \u2212 1)((2\"a\")\"b\"\u22121 + (2\"a\")\"b\"\u22122 + ... + 2\"a\" + 1) so 2\"p\" \u2212 1 is composite. By contraposition, if 2\"p\" \u2212 1 is prime then \"p\" is prime.\n 31 is prime, and 31 \n 1 + 3 \u00d7 (2 \u00d7 5). A composite example is 211 \u2212 1 \n 23 \u00d7 89, where 23 \n 1 + (2 \u00d7 11) and 89 \n 1 + 4 \u00d7 (2 \u00d7 11).\n 2\"m\" \u2212 1 is a Mersenne prime, then the congruence 2\"p\"\u22121 \u2261 1 (mod \"p\"2) does not hold. By Fermat's little theorem, \"m\" | \"p\" \u2212 1. Therefore, one can write \"p\" \u2212 1 \n \"m\u03bb\". If the given congruence is satisfied, then \"p\"2 | 2\"m\u03bb\" \u2212 1, therefore 0 \u2261 \n 1 + 2\"m\" + 22\"m\" + ... + 2(\"\u03bb\" \u2212 1)\"m\" \u2261 \"\u03bb\" mod (2\"m\" \u2212 1). Hence p | \"\u03bb\", and therefore \u22121 = 0 (mod p) which is impossible.\n 2 \u00d7 4 + 3, so 23 divides 211 \u2212 1.\n (2(\"p\" + 1))2 \u2261 \u22122 (mod \"q\"), so \u22122 would be a quadratic residue mod q. However, since p is congruent to 3 (mod 4), q is congruent to 7 (mod 8) and therefore 2 is a quadratic residue mod q. Also since q is congruent to 3 (mod 4), \u22121 is a quadratic nonresidue mod q, so \u22122 is the product of a residue and a nonresidue and hence it is a nonresidue, which is a contradiction. Hence, the former congruence must be true and 2\"p\" + 1 divides Mp.\n \"nk\" has no solutions where m, n, and k are integers with \"m\" &gt; 1 and \"k\" &gt; 1.\n 3\"m\"\"n\"\u22121 \u2212 2\"m\"\"n\"\u22122 with \"m\"0 \n 0 and \"m\"1 \n 1.\nList of known Mersenne primes.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the 52 known Mersenne primes are 2\"p\" \u2212 1 for the following \"p\":\n2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 17, 19, 31, 61, 89, 107, 127, 521, 607, 1279, 2203, 2281, 3217, 4253, 4423, 9689, 9941, 11213, 19937, 21701, 23209, 44497, 86243, 110503, 132049, 216091, 756839, 859433, 1257787, 1398269, 2976221, 3021377, 6972593, 13466917, 20996011, 24036583, 25964951, 30402457, 32582657, 37156667, 42643801, 43112609, 57885161, 74207281, 77232917, 82589933, 136279841. (sequence in the OEIS)\nFactorization of composite Mersenne numbers.\nSince they are prime numbers, Mersenne primes are divisible only by 1 and themselves. However, not all Mersenne numbers are Mersenne primes. Mersenne numbers are very good test cases for the special number field sieve algorithm, so often the largest number factorized with this algorithm has been a Mersenne number. As of \u00a02019[ [update]], 21,193 \u2212 1 is the record-holder, having been factored with a variant of the special number field sieve that allows the factorization of several numbers at once. See integer factorization records for links to more information. The special number field sieve can factorize numbers with more than one large factor. If a number has only one very large factor then other algorithms can factorize larger numbers by first finding small factors and then running a primality test on the cofactor. As of \u00a02022[ [update]], the largest completely factored number (with probable prime factors allowed) is , where q is a 3,829,294-digit probable prime. It was discovered by a GIMPS participant with nickname \"Funky Waddle\". As of \u00a02022[ [update]], the Mersenne number \"M\"1277 is the smallest composite Mersenne number with no known factors; it has no prime factors below 268, and is very unlikely to have any factors below 1065 (~2216).\nThe table below shows factorizations for the first 20 composite Mersenne numbers where the exponent \"p\" is a prime number (sequence in the OEIS).\nThe number of factors for the first 500 Mersenne numbers can be found at (sequence in the OEIS).\nMersenne numbers in nature and elsewhere.\nIn the mathematical problem Tower of Hanoi, solving a puzzle with an \"n\"-disc tower requires \"Mn\" steps, assuming no mistakes are made. The number of rice grains on the whole chessboard in the wheat and chessboard problem is \"M64\".\nThe asteroid with minor planet number 8191 is named 8191 Mersenne after Marin Mersenne, because 8191 is a Mersenne prime.\nIn geometry, an integer right triangle that is primitive and has its even leg a power of 2 (\u00a0\u2265 4\u00a0) generates a unique right triangle such that its inradius is always a Mersenne number. For example, if the even leg is 2\"n\"\u00a0+\u00a01 then because it is primitive it constrains the odd leg to be 4\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01, the hypotenuse to be 4\"n\"\u00a0+\u00a01 and its inradius to be 2\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01.\nAlso in geometry, the number of polytopes that are part of the family of polytopes formed by a truncation operation of a base regular polytope and its dual (excluding alternation) is equal to \"Mn\" where n is the dimension of the base polytope. For example, a tesseract and its dual the hexadecachoron have \"M4\" \n 15 different polytopes in its family formed by truncation operations.\nMersenne\u2013Fermat primes.\nA Mersenne\u2013Fermat number is defined as with \"p\" prime, \"r\" natural number, and can be written as MF(\"p\", \"r\"). When \"r\" \n 1, it is a Mersenne number. When \"p\" \n 2, it is a Fermat number. The only known Mersenne\u2013Fermat primes with \"r\" &gt; 1 are\nMF(2, 2), MF(2, 3), MF(2, 4), MF(2, 5), MF(3, 2), MF(3, 3), MF(7, 2), and MF(59, 2).\nIn fact, MF(\"p\", \"r\") \n \"\u03a6pr\"(2), where \"\u03a6\" is the cyclotomic polynomial.\nGeneralizations.\nThe simplest generalized Mersenne primes are prime numbers of the form \"f\"(2\"n\"), where \"f\"(\"x\") is a low-degree polynomial with small integer coefficients. An example is 264 \u2212 232 + 1, in this case, \"n\" \n 32, and \"f\"(\"x\") \n \"x\"2 \u2212 \"x\" + 1; another example is 2192 \u2212 264 \u2212 1, in this case, \"n\" \n 64, and \"f\"(\"x\") \n \"x\"3 \u2212 \"x\" \u2212 1.\nIt is also natural to try to generalize primes of the form 2\"n\" \u2212 1 to primes of the form \"b\"\"n\" \u2212 1 (for \"b\" \u2260 2 and \"n\" &gt; 1). However (see also theorems above), \"b\"\"n\" \u2212 1 is always divisible by \"b\" \u2212 1, so unless the latter is a unit, the former is not a prime. This can be remedied by allowing \"b\" to be an algebraic integer instead of an integer:\nComplex numbers.\nIn the ring of integers (on real numbers), if \"b\" \u2212 1 is a unit, then \"b\" is either 2 or 0. But 2\"n\" \u2212 1 are the usual Mersenne primes, and the formula 0\"n\" \u2212 1 does not lead to anything interesting (since it is always \u22121 for all \"n\" &gt; 0). Thus, we can regard a ring of \"integers\" on complex numbers instead of real numbers, like Gaussian integers and Eisenstein integers.\nGaussian Mersenne primes.\nIf we regard the ring of Gaussian integers, we get the case \"b\" \n 1 + \"i\" and \"b\" \n 1 \u2212 \"i\", and can ask (WLOG) for which \"n\" the number (1 + \"i\")\"n\" \u2212 1 is a Gaussian prime which will then be called a Gaussian Mersenne prime.\n(1 + \"i\")\"n\" \u2212 1 is a Gaussian prime for the following \"n\":\n2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 19, 29, 47, 73, 79, 113, 151, 157, 163, 167, 239, 241, 283, 353, 367, 379, 457, 997, 1367, 3041, 10141, 14699, 27529, 49207, 77291, 85237, 106693, 160423, 203789, 364289, 991961, 1203793, 1667321, 3704053, 4792057, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nLike the sequence of exponents for usual Mersenne primes, this sequence contains only (rational) prime numbers.\nAs for all Gaussian primes, the norms (that is, squares of absolute values) of these numbers are rational primes:\n5, 13, 41, 113, 2113, 525313, 536903681, 140737471578113, ... (sequence in the OEIS).\nEisenstein Mersenne primes.\nOne may encounter cases where such a Mersenne prime is also an \"Eisenstein prime\", being of the form \"b\" \n 1 + \"\u03c9\" and \"b\" \n 1 \u2212 \"\u03c9\". In these cases, such numbers are called Eisenstein Mersenne primes.\n(1 + \"\u03c9\")\"n\" \u2212 1 is an Eisenstein prime for the following \"n\":\n2, 5, 7, 11, 17, 19, 79, 163, 193, 239, 317, 353, 659, 709, 1049, 1103, 1759, 2029, 5153, 7541, 9049, 10453, 23743, 255361, 534827, 2237561, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nThe norms (that is, squares of absolute values) of these Eisenstein primes are rational primes:\n7, 271, 2269, 176419, 129159847, 1162320517, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nDivide an integer.\nRepunit primes.\nThe other way to deal with the fact that \"b\"\"n\" \u2212 1 is always divisible by \"b\" \u2212 1, it is to simply take out this factor and ask which values of \"n\" make\nformula_9\nbe prime. (The integer \"b\" can be either positive or negative.) If, for example, we take \"b\" \n 10, we get \"n\" values of:\n2, 19, 23, 317, 1031, 49081, 86453, 109297, 270343, ... (sequence in the OEIS),&lt;br&gt;corresponding to primes 11, 1111111111111111111, 11111111111111111111111, ... (sequence in the OEIS).\nThese primes are called repunit primes. Another example is when we take \"b\" \n \u221212, we get \"n\" values of:\n2, 5, 11, 109, 193, 1483, 11353, 21419, 21911, 24071, 106859, 139739, ... (sequence in the OEIS),&lt;br&gt;corresponding to primes \u221211, 19141, 57154490053, ...\nIt is a conjecture that for every integer \"b\" which is not a perfect power, there are infinitely many values of \"n\" such that is prime. (When \"b\" is a perfect power, it can be shown that there is at most one \"n\" value such that is prime)\nLeast \"n\" such that is prime are (starting with \"b\" \n 2, 0 if no such \"n\" exists)\n2, 3, 2, 3, 2, 5, 3, 0, 2, 17, 2, 5, 3, 3, 2, 3, 2, 19, 3, 3, 2, 5, 3, 0, 7, 3, 2, 5, 2, 7, 0, 3, 13, 313, 2, 13, 3, 349, 2, 3, 2, 5, 5, 19, 2, 127, 19, 0, 3, 4229, 2, 11, 3, 17, 7, 3, 2, 3, 2, 7, 3, 5, 0, 19, 2, 19, 5, 3, 2, 3, 2, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nFor negative bases \"b\", they are (starting with \"b\" \n \u22122, 0 if no such \"n\" exists)\n3, 2, 2, 5, 2, 3, 2, 3, 5, 5, 2, 3, 2, 3, 3, 7, 2, 17, 2, 3, 3, 11, 2, 3, 11, 0, 3, 7, 2, 109, 2, 5, 3, 11, 31, 5, 2, 3, 53, 17, 2, 5, 2, 103, 7, 5, 2, 7, 1153, 3, 7, 21943, 2, 3, 37, 53, 3, 17, 2, 7, 2, 3, 0, 19, 7, 3, 2, 11, 3, 5, 2, ... (sequence in the OEIS) (notice this OEIS sequence does not allow \"n\" \n 2)\nLeast base \"b\" such that is prime are\n2, 2, 2, 2, 5, 2, 2, 2, 10, 6, 2, 61, 14, 15, 5, 24, 19, 2, 46, 3, 11, 22, 41, 2, 12, 22, 3, 2, 12, 86, 2, 7, 13, 11, 5, 29, 56, 30, 44, 60, 304, 5, 74, 118, 33, 156, 46, 183, 72, 606, 602, 223, 115, 37, 52, 104, 41, 6, 338, 217, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nFor negative bases \"b\", they are\n3, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 7, 2, 16, 61, 2, 6, 10, 6, 2, 5, 46, 18, 2, 49, 16, 70, 2, 5, 6, 12, 92, 2, 48, 89, 30, 16, 147, 19, 19, 2, 16, 11, 289, 2, 12, 52, 2, 66, 9, 22, 5, 489, 69, 137, 16, 36, 96, 76, 117, 26, 3, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nOther generalized Mersenne primes.\nAnother generalized Mersenne number is\nformula_10\nwith a, b any coprime integers, \"a\" &gt; 1 and \u2212\"a\" &lt; \"b\" &lt; \"a\". (Since \"a\"\"n\" \u2212 \"b\"\"n\" is always divisible by \"a\" \u2212 \"b\", the division is necessary for there to be any chance of finding prime numbers.) We can ask which n makes this number prime. It can be shown that such n must be primes themselves or equal to 4, and n can be 4 if and only if \"a\" + \"b\" \n 1 and \"a\"2 + \"b\"2 is prime. It is a conjecture that for any pair (\"a\", \"b\") such that a and b are not both perfect rth powers for any r and \u22124\"ab\" is not a perfect fourth power, there are infinitely many values of n such that is prime. However, this has not been proved for any single value of (\"a\", \"b\").\nWhen \"a\" \n \"b\" + 1, it is (\"b\" + 1)\"n\" \u2212 \"b\"\"n\", a difference of two consecutive perfect nth powers, and if \"a\"\"n\" \u2212 \"b\"\"n\" is prime, then a must be \"b\" + 1, because it is divisible by \"a\" \u2212 \"b\".\nLeast n such that (\"b\" + 1)\"n\" \u2212 \"b\"\"n\" is prime are\n2, 2, 2, 3, 2, 2, 7, 2, 2, 3, 2, 17, 3, 2, 2, 5, 3, 2, 5, 2, 2, 229, 2, 3, 3, 2, 3, 3, 2, 2, 5, 3, 2, 3, 2, 2, 3, 3, 2, 7, 2, 3, 37, 2, 3, 5, 58543, 2, 3, 2, 2, 3, 2, 2, 3, 2, 5, 3, 4663, 54517, 17, 3, 2, 5, 2, 3, 3, 2, 2, 47, 61, 19, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nLeast b such that (\"b\" + 1)prime(\"n\") \u2212 \"b\"prime(\"n\") is prime are\n1, 1, 1, 1, 5, 1, 1, 1, 5, 2, 1, 39, 6, 4, 12, 2, 2, 1, 6, 17, 46, 7, 5, 1, 25, 2, 41, 1, 12, 7, 1, 7, 327, 7, 8, 44, 26, 12, 75, 14, 51, 110, 4, 14, 49, 286, 15, 4, 39, 22, 109, 367, 22, 67, 27, 95, 80, 149, 2, 142, 3, 11, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n (8\"x\")2 \u2212 (3\"qy\")2 http:// (PDF)\n \"x\"2 + \"d\"\u00b7\"y\"2 https:// (PS)"}
{"id": "18909", "revid": "50479220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18909", "title": "Magnesium", "text": "element with atomic number 12 (Mg)\nMagnesium is a chemical element; it has symbol Mg and atomic number 12. It is a shiny gray metal having a low density, low melting point and high chemical reactivity. Like the other alkaline earth metals (group 2 of the periodic table), it occurs naturally only in combination with other elements and almost always has an oxidation state of +2. It reacts readily with air to form a thin passivation coating of magnesium oxide that inhibits further corrosion of the metal. The free metal burns with a brilliant-white light. The metal is obtained mainly by electrolysis of magnesium salts obtained from brine. It is less dense than aluminium and is used primarily as a component in strong and lightweight alloys that contain aluminium.\nIn the cosmos, magnesium is produced in large, aging stars by the sequential addition of three helium nuclei to a carbon nucleus. When such stars explode as supernovas, much of the magnesium is expelled into the interstellar medium where it may recycle into new star systems. Magnesium is the eighth most abundant element in the Earth's crust and the fourth most common element in the Earth (after iron, oxygen and silicon), making up 13% of the planet's mass and a large fraction of the planet's mantle. It is the third most abundant element dissolved in seawater, after sodium and chlorine.\nThis element is the eleventh most abundant element by mass in the human body and is essential to all cells and some 300 enzymes. Magnesium ions interact with polyphosphate compounds such as ATP, DNA, and RNA. Hundreds of enzymes require magnesium ions to function. Magnesium compounds are used medicinally as common laxatives and antacids (such as milk of magnesia), and to stabilize abnormal nerve excitation or blood vessel spasm in such conditions as eclampsia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical properties.\nElemental magnesium is a gray-white lightweight metal, two-thirds the density of aluminium. Magnesium has the lowest melting () and the lowest boiling point () of all the alkaline earth metals.\nPure polycrystalline magnesium is brittle and easily fractures along shear bands. It becomes much more malleable when alloyed with small amounts of other metals, such as 1% aluminium. The malleability of polycrystalline magnesium can also be significantly improved by reducing its grain size to about 1\u00a0\u03bcm or less.\nChemical properties.\nOxidation.\nMagnesium is widely used as a reducing agent. Although it oxidises in air, it does not need an inert atmosphere for storage; it forms a thin layer of magnesium oxide that protects the rest of the metal.\nDirect reaction of magnesium with air or oxygen at ambient pressure forms only the \"normal\" oxide MgO. However, this oxide may be combined with hydrogen peroxide to form magnesium peroxide, MgO2, and at low temperature the peroxide may be further reacted with ozone to form magnesium superoxide Mg(O2)2.\nMagnesium reacts with nitrogen in the solid state if it is powdered and heated to just below the melting point, forming magnesium nitride Mg3N2.\nMagnesium reacts with water at room temperature, though it reacts much more slowly than calcium, a similar group 2 metal. When submerged in water, hydrogen bubbles form slowly on the surface of the metal; this reaction happens much more rapidly with powdered magnesium. The reaction also occurs faster with higher temperatures (see ). Magnesium's reversible reaction with water can be harnessed to store energy and run a magnesium-based engine. Magnesium also reacts exothermically with most acids such as hydrochloric acid (HCl), producing magnesium chloride and hydrogen gas, similar to the HCl reaction with aluminium, zinc, and many other metals. Although it is difficult to ignite in mass or bulk, magnesium metal will ignite.\nMagnesium may also be used as an igniter for thermite, a mixture of aluminium and iron oxide powder that ignites only at a very high temperature.\nReaction with water.\nWhen finely powdered, magnesium reacts with water to produce magnesium hydroxide and hydrogen gas:\n Mg(s) + 2 H2O(l) \u2192 Mg(OH)2(aq) + H2(g)\nHowever, this reaction is much less dramatic than the reactions of the alkali metals with water, because the magnesium hydroxide builds up on the surface of the magnesium metal and inhibits further reaction.\nIn addition, when reacting with steam it produces magnesium oxide and hydrogen:\nMg(s) + H2O(g) \u2192 MgO(aq) + H2(g)\nOrganic chemistry.\nOrganomagnesium compounds are widespread in organic chemistry. They are commonly found as Grignard reagents, formed by reaction of magnesium with haloalkanes or aryl halides in diethyl ether. Examples of Grignard reagents are phenylmagnesium bromide and ethylmagnesium bromide. The Grignard reagents function as a common nucleophile, attacking the electrophilic group such as the carbon atom that is present within the polar bond of a carbonyl group.\nA prominent organomagnesium reagent beyond Grignard reagents is magnesium anthracene or magnesocene, which is used as a source of highly active magnesium. First prepared in 1954 by independent groups, one led by Ernst Otto Fischer, the other by Albert Wilkinson, magnesocene is a white to off-yellow pyrophoric powder that violently hydrolyses in water. The related butadiene-magnesium adduct serves as a source for the butadiene dianion.\nComplexes of dimagnesium(I) have been observed.\nDetection in solution.\nThe presence of magnesium ions can be detected by the addition of ammonium chloride, ammonium hydroxide and monosodium phosphate to an aqueous or dilute HCl solution of the salt. The formation of a white precipitate indicates the presence of magnesium ions.\nAzo violet dye can also be used, turning deep blue in the presence of an alkaline solution of magnesium salt. The color is due to the adsorption of azo violet by Mg(OH)2.\nForms.\nAlloys.\nAs of 2013, consumption of magnesium alloys was less than one million tonnes per year, compared with 50 million tonnes of aluminium alloys. Their use has been historically limited by the tendency of Mg alloys to corrode, creep at high temperatures, and combust.\nCorrosion.\nIn magnesium alloys, the presence of iron, nickel, copper, or cobalt strongly activates corrosion. In more than trace amounts, these metals precipitate as intermetallic compounds, and the precipitate locales function as active cathodic sites that reduce water, causing the loss of magnesium. Controlling the quantity of these metals improves corrosion resistance. Sufficient manganese overcomes the corrosive effects of iron. This requires precise control over composition, increasing costs. Adding a cathodic poison captures atomic hydrogen within the structure of a metal. This prevents the formation of free hydrogen gas, an essential factor of corrosive chemical processes. The addition of about one in three hundred parts arsenic reduces the corrosion rate of magnesium in a salt solution by a factor of nearly ten.\nHigh-temperature creep and flammability.\nMagnesium's tendency to creep (gradually deform) at high temperatures is greatly reduced by alloying with zinc and rare-earth elements. Flammability is significantly reduced by a small amount of calcium in the alloy. By using rare-earth elements, it may be possible to manufacture magnesium alloys that are able to not catch fire at higher temperatures compared to magnesium's liquidus and in some cases potentially pushing it close to magnesium's boiling point.\nCompounds.\nMagnesium forms a variety of compounds important to industry and biology, including magnesium carbonate, magnesium chloride, magnesium citrate, magnesium hydroxide (milk of magnesia), magnesium oxide, magnesium sulfate, and magnesium sulfate heptahydrate (Epsom salts).\nAs recently as 2020, magnesium hydride was under investigation as a way to store hydrogen.\nIsotopes.\nMagnesium has three stable isotopes: 24Mg, 25Mg and 26Mg. All are present in significant amounts in nature (see table of isotopes above). About 79% of Mg is 24Mg. The isotope 28Mg is radioactive and in the 1950s to 1970s was produced by several nuclear power plants for use in scientific experiments. This isotope has a relatively short half-life (21 hours) and its use was limited by shipping times.\nThe nuclide 26Mg has found application in isotopic geology, similar to that of aluminium. 26Mg is a radiogenic daughter product of 26Al, which has a half-life of 717,000 years. Excessive quantities of stable 26Mg have been observed in the Ca-Al-rich inclusions of some carbonaceous chondrite meteorites. This anomalous abundance is attributed to the decay of its parent 26Al in the inclusions, and researchers conclude that such meteorites were formed in the solar nebula before the 26Al had decayed. These are among the oldest objects in the Solar System and contain preserved information about its early history.\nIt is conventional to plot 26Mg/24Mg against an Al/Mg ratio. In an isochron dating plot, the Al/Mg ratio plotted is 27Al/24Mg. The slope of the isochron has no age significance, but indicates the initial 26Al/27Al ratio in the sample at the time when the systems were separated from a common reservoir.\nProduction.\nOccurrence.\nMagnesium is the eighth-most-abundant element in the Earth's crust by mass and tied in seventh place with iron in molarity. It is found in large deposits of magnesite, dolomite, and other minerals, and in mineral waters, where magnesium ion is soluble.\nAlthough magnesium is found in more than 60 minerals, only dolomite, magnesite, brucite, carnallite, talc, and olivine are of commercial importance.\nThe Mg2+ cation is the second-most-abundant cation in seawater (about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448 the mass of sodium ions in a given sample), which makes seawater and sea salt attractive commercial sources for Mg.\nProduction quantities.\nWorld production was approximately 1,100 kt in 2017, with the bulk being produced in China (930 kt) and Russia (60 kt). The United States was in the 20th century the major world supplier of this metal, supplying 45% of world production even as recently as 1995. Since the Chinese mastery of the Pidgeon process the US market share is at 7%, with a single US producer left as of 2013: US Magnesium, a Renco Group company located on the shores of the Great Salt Lake.\nIn September 2021, China took steps to reduce production of magnesium as a result of a government initiative to reduce energy availability for manufacturing industries, leading to a significant price increase.\nPidgeon and Bolzano processes.\nThe Pidgeon process and the Bolzano process are similar. In both, magnesium oxide is the precursor to magnesium metal. The magnesium oxide is produced as a solid solution with calcium oxide by calcining the mineral dolomite, which is a solid solution of calcium and magnesium carbonates:\nReduction occurs at high temperatures with silicon. A ferrosilicon alloy is used rather than pure silicon as it is more economical. The iron component has no bearing on the reaction, having the simplified equation:\nThe calcium oxide combines with silicon as the oxygen scavenger, yielding the very stable calcium silicate. The Mg/Ca ratio of the precursors can be adjusted by the addition of MgO or CaO.\nThe Pidgeon and the Bolzano process differ in the details of the heating and the configuration of the reactor. Both generate gaseous Mg that is condensed and collected. The Pidgeon process dominates the worldwide production. The Pidgeon method is less technologically complex and because of distillation/vapour deposition conditions, a high purity product is easily achievable. China is almost completely reliant on the silicothermic Pidgeon process.\nDow process.\nBesides the Pidgeon process, the second most used process for magnesium production is electrolysis. This is a two step process. The first step is to prepare feedstock containing magnesium chloride and the second step is to dissociate the compound in electrolytic cells as magnesium metal and chlorine gas.\nTo extract the magnesium, calcium hydroxide is added to the seawater to precipitate magnesium hydroxide.\n MgCl2 + Ca(OH)2 \u2192 Mg(OH)2 + CaCl2\nMagnesium hydroxide (brucite) is poorly soluble in water and can be collected by filtration. It reacts with hydrochloric acid to magnesium chloride.\n Mg(OH)2 + 2 HCl \u2192 MgCl2 + 2 H2O\nFrom magnesium chloride, electrolysis produces magnesium.\nThe basic reaction is as follows:\nThe temperatures at which this reaction is operated is between 680 and 750\u00a0\u00b0C.\nThe magnesium chloride can be obtained using the Dow process, a process that mixes sea water and dolomite in a flocculator or by dehydration of magnesium chloride brines. The electrolytic cells are partially submerged in a molten salt electrolyte to which the produced magnesium chloride is added in concentrations between 6\u201318%. This process does have its share of disadvantages including production of harmful chlorine gas and the overall reaction being very energy intensive, creating environmental risks. The Pidgeon process is more advantageous regarding its simplicity, shorter construction period, low power consumption and overall good magnesium quality compared to the electrolysis method.\nIn the United States, magnesium was once obtained principally with the Dow process in Corpus Christi TX, by electrolysis of fused magnesium chloride from brine and sea water. A saline solution containing Mg2+ ions is first treated with lime (calcium oxide) and the precipitated magnesium hydroxide is collected:\nMg2+(aq) + CaO(s) + H2O(l) \u2192 Ca2+(aq) + Mg(OH)2(s)\nThe hydroxide is then converted to magnesium chloride by treatment with hydrochloric acid and heating of the product to eliminate water:\nThe salt is then electrolyzed in the molten state. At the cathode, the Mg2+ ion is reduced by two electrons to magnesium metal:\nMg2+ + 2 \u2192 Mg\nAt the anode, each pair of Cl- ions is oxidized to chlorine gas, releasing two electrons to complete the circuit:\n2Cl- \u2192 Cl2(g) + 2\nCarbothermic process.\nThe carbothermic route to magnesium has been recognized as a low energy, yet high productivity path to magnesium extraction. The chemistry is as follows:\nA disadvantage of this method is that slow cooling the vapour can cause the reaction to quickly revert. To prevent this from happening, the magnesium can be dissolved directly in a suitable metal solvent before reversion starts happening. Rapid quenching of the vapour can also be performed to prevent reversion.\nYSZ process.\nA newer process, solid oxide membrane technology, involves the electrolytic reduction of MgO. At the cathode, Mg2+ ion is reduced by two electrons to magnesium metal. The electrolyte is yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ). The anode is a liquid metal. At the YSZ/liquid metal anode O2- is oxidized. A layer of graphite borders the liquid metal anode, and at this interface carbon and oxygen react to form carbon monoxide. When silver is used as the liquid metal anode, there is no reductant carbon or hydrogen needed, and only oxygen gas is evolved at the anode. It was reported in 2011 that this method provides a 40% reduction in cost per pound over the electrolytic reduction method.\nRieke process.\nRieke et al. developed a \"general approach for preparing highly reactive metal powders by reducing metal salts in ethereal or hydrocarbon solvents using alkali metals as reducing agents\" now known as the Rieke process. Rieke finalized the identification of Rieke metals in 1989, one of which was Rieke-magnesium, first produced in 1974.\nHistory.\nThe name magnesium originates from the Greek word for locations related to the tribe of the Magnetes, either a district in Thessaly called Magnesia or Magnesia ad Sipylum, now in Turkey. It is related to magnetite and manganese, which also originated from this area, and required differentiation as separate substances. See manganese for this history.\nIn 1618, a farmer at Epsom in England attempted to give his cows water from a local well. The cows refused to drink because of the water's bitter taste, but the farmer noticed that the water seemed to heal scratches and rashes. The substance obtained by evaporating the water became known as Epsom salts and its fame spread. It was eventually recognized as hydrated magnesium sulfate, MgSO4\u00b77\u200aH2O.\nThe metal itself was first isolated by Sir Humphry Davy in England in 1808. He used electrolysis on a mixture of magnesia and mercuric oxide. Antoine Bussy prepared it in coherent form in 1831. Davy's first suggestion for a name was 'magnium', but the name magnesium is now used in most European languages.\nFurther discoveries about magnesium were made by the father of physical chemistry in Imperial Russia, Nikolai Beketov (1827\u20131911), who established that magnesium and zinc displaced other metals from their salts under high temperatures.\nUses.\nMagnesium metal.\nMagnesium is the third-most-commonly-used structural metal, following iron and aluminium. The main applications of magnesium are, in order: aluminium alloys, die-casting (alloyed with zinc), removing sulfur in the production of iron and steel, and the production of titanium in the Kroll process.\nMagnesium is used in lightweight materials and alloys. For example, when infused with silicon carbide nanoparticles, it has extremely high specific strength.\nHistorically, magnesium was one of the main aerospace construction metals and was used for German military aircraft as early as World War I and extensively for German aircraft in World War II. The Germans coined the name \"Elektron\" for magnesium alloy, a term which is still used today. In the commercial aerospace industry, magnesium was generally restricted to engine-related components, due to fire and corrosion hazards. Magnesium alloy use in aerospace is increasing in the 21st century, driven by the importance of fuel economy. Magnesium alloys can act as replacements for aluminium and steel alloys in structural applications.\nAutomotive.\nBoth AJ62A and AE44 are recent developments in high-temperature low-creep magnesium alloys. The general strategy for such alloys is to form intermetallic precipitates at the grain boundaries, for example by adding mischmetal or calcium.\nElectronics.\nBecause of low density and good mechanical and electrical properties, magnesium is used for manufacturing of mobile phones, laptop and tablet computers, cameras, and other electronic components. It was used as a premium feature because of its light weight in some 2020 laptops.\nSource of light.\nMagnesium is flammable, burning at a temperature of approximately , and the autoignition temperature of magnesium ribbon is approximately . Magnesium's high combustion temperature makes it a useful tool for starting emergency fires. When burning in air, magnesium produces a brilliant white light that includes strong ultraviolet wavelengths.\nMagnesium powder (flash powder) was used for subject illumination in the early days of photography. Magnesium filament used in electrically ignited single-use photography flashbulbs replaced this usage eventually. Magnesium powder is used in fireworks and marine flares where a brilliant light is required, and in trick self-relighting birthday candles. It was also used for various theatrical effects, such as lightning, pistol flashes, and supernatural appearances.\nMagnesium is often used to ignite thermite or other materials that require a high ignition temperature. Magnesium continues to be used as an incendiary element in warfare.\nFlame temperatures of magnesium and magnesium alloys can reach , although flame height above the burning metal is usually less than . Once ignited, such fires are difficult to extinguish because they resist several substances commonly used to put out fires; combustion continues in nitrogen (forming magnesium nitride), in carbon dioxide (forming magnesium oxide and carbon), and in water (forming magnesium oxide and hydrogen, which also combusts due to heat in the presence of additional oxygen). This property was used in incendiary weapons during the firebombing of cities in World War II, where the only practical civil defense was to smother a burning flare under dry sand to exclude atmosphere from the combustion.\nChemical reagent.\nIn the form of turnings or ribbons, to prepare Grignard reagents, which are useful in organic synthesis.\nCompounds.\nMagnesium compounds, primarily magnesium oxide (MgO), are used as a refractory material in furnace linings for producing iron, steel, nonferrous metals, glass, and cement. Magnesium oxide and other magnesium compounds are also used in the agricultural, chemical, and construction industries. Magnesium oxide from calcination is used as an electrical insulator in fire-resistant cables.\nMagnesium reacts with haloalkanes to give Grignard reagents, which are used for a wide variety of organic reactions forming carbon\u2013carbon bonds.\nMagnesium salts are included in various foods, fertilizers (magnesium is a component of chlorophyll), and microbe culture media.\nMagnesium sulfite is used in the manufacture of paper (sulfite process).\nMagnesium phosphate is used to fireproof wood used in construction.\nMagnesium hexafluorosilicate is used for moth-proofing textiles.\nBiological roles.\nMechanism of action.\nThe important interaction between phosphate and magnesium ions makes magnesium essential to the basic nucleic acid chemistry of all cells of all known living organisms. More than 300 enzymes require magnesium ions for their catalytic action, including all enzymes using or synthesizing ATP and those that use other nucleotides to synthesize DNA and RNA. The ATP molecule is normally found in a chelate with a magnesium ion.\nNutrition.\nMagnesium intake\u2014especially from diet\u2014may modestly lower blood pressure and reduce risks of stroke and sudden cardiac death, but evidence is mixed, effects are small, and more robust clinical trials are needed to clarify its role in cardiovascular disease prevention.\nDiet.\nSpices, nuts, cereals, cocoa and vegetables are good sources of magnesium. Green leafy vegetables such as spinach are also rich in magnesium.\nDietary recommendations.\nIn the UK, the recommended daily values by the Dietary Reference Intake for magnesium are for men and for women.\nIn the U.S. the Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) are for men ages 19\u201330 and for older; for women for ages 19\u201330 and for older.\nSupplementation.\nNumerous pharmaceutical preparations of magnesium and dietary supplements are available. Most people get enough magnesium through a healthy diet, though supplements may help in specific conditions like magnesium deficiency, pregnancy complications, or certain chronic health issues.\nA 2014 literature review found limited evidence supporting oral magnesium supplementation for migraine prevention, suggesting that increasing dietary magnesium intake may be a more effective option for patients open to lifestyle changes.\nMetabolism.\nAn adult body contains of magnesium, with 60% in the skeleton, 39% intracellular (20% in skeletal muscle), and 1% extracellular. Serum levels are typically or . Serum magnesium levels may be normal even when intracellular magnesium is deficient. The mechanisms for maintaining the magnesium level in the serum are varying gastrointestinal absorption and renal excretion. Intracellular magnesium is correlated with intracellular potassium. Increased magnesium lowers calcium and can either prevent hypercalcemia or cause hypocalcemia depending on the initial level. Both low and high protein intake conditions inhibit magnesium absorption, as does the amount of phosphate, phytate, and fat in the gut. Unabsorbed dietary magnesium is excreted in feces; absorbed magnesium is excreted in urine and sweat.\nDetection in serum and plasma.\nMagnesium status may be assessed by measuring serum and erythrocyte magnesium concentrations coupled with urinary and fecal magnesium content, but intravenous magnesium loading tests are more accurate and practical. A retention of 20% or more of the injected amount indicates deficiency. As of 2004, no biomarker has been established for magnesium.\nMagnesium concentrations in plasma or serum may be monitored for efficacy and safety in those receiving the drug therapeutically, to confirm the diagnosis in potential poisoning victims. The newborn children of mothers who received parenteral magnesium sulfate during labor may exhibit toxicity with normal serum magnesium levels.\nDeficiency.\nLow plasma magnesium (hypomagnesemia) is common: it is found in 2.5\u201315% of the general population. From 2005 to 2006, 48 percent of the United States population consumed less magnesium than recommended in the Dietary Reference Intake. Other causes are increased renal or gastrointestinal loss, an increased intracellular shift, and proton-pump inhibitor antacid therapy. Most are asymptomatic, but symptoms referable to neuromuscular, cardiovascular, and metabolic dysfunction may occur. Alcoholism is often associated with magnesium deficiency. Chronically low serum magnesium levels are associated with metabolic syndrome, diabetes mellitus type 2, fasciculation, and hypertension.\nTherapy.\nOther medical applications.\nSorted by type of magnesium salt, other therapeutic applications include:\nOverdose.\nOverdose from dietary sources alone is unlikely because excess magnesium in the blood is promptly filtered by the kidneys. Overdose is more likely in the presence of impaired renal function. Overdose is likely in cases of excessive intake of supplements. Megavitamin therapy has caused death in a child, and severe hypermagnesemia in a woman and a young girl who had healthy kidneys. The most common symptoms of overdose are nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea; other symptoms include hypotension, confusion, slowed heart and respiratory rates, deficiencies of other minerals, coma, cardiac arrhythmia, and death from cardiac arrest.\nFunction in plants.\nPlants require magnesium to synthesize chlorophyll, essential for photosynthesis. Magnesium in the center of the porphyrin ring in chlorophyll functions in a manner similar to the iron in the center of the porphyrin ring in heme. Magnesium deficiency in plants causes late-season yellowing between leaf veins, especially in older leaves, and can be corrected by either applying epsom salts (which is rapidly leached), or crushed dolomitic limestone, to the soil.\nSafety precautions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nMagnesium metal and its alloys can be explosive hazards; they are highly flammable in their pure form when molten or in powder or ribbon form. Burning or molten magnesium reacts violently with water. When working with powdered magnesium, safety glasses with eye protection and UV filters (such as welders use) are employed because burning magnesium produces ultraviolet light that can permanently damage the retina of a human eye.\nMagnesium is capable of reducing water and releasing highly flammable hydrogen gas:\nMg(s) + 2 H2O(l) \u2192 Mg(OH)2(s) + H2(g)\nTherefore, water cannot extinguish magnesium fires. The hydrogen gas produced intensifies the fire. Dry sand is an effective smothering agent, but only on relatively level and flat surfaces.\nMagnesium reacts with carbon dioxide exothermically to form magnesium oxide and carbon:\n2 Mg(s) + CO2(g) \u2192 2 MgO(s) + C(s)\nHence, carbon dioxide fuels rather than extinguishes magnesium fires.\nBurning magnesium can be quenched by using a Class D dry chemical fire extinguisher, or by covering the fire with sand or magnesium foundry flux to remove its air source.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18910", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18910", "title": "Markup language", "text": "Modern system for document annotation\nA markup language is a text-encoding system which specifies the structure and formatting of a document and potentially the relationships among its parts. Markup can control the display of a document or enrich its content to facilitate automated processing.\nA markup language is a set of rules governing what markup information may be included in a document and how it is combined with the content of the document in a way to facilitate use by humans and computer programs. The idea and terminology evolved from the marking up of paper manuscripts (e.g., with revision instructions by editors), traditionally written with a red pen or blue pencil on authors' manuscripts.\nOlder markup languages, which typically focus on typesetting and presentation, include troff, TeX, and LaTeX. Scribe and most modern markup languages, such as XML, identify document components (for example headings, paragraphs, and tables), with the expectation that technology, such as stylesheets, will be used to apply formatting or other processing.\nSome markup languages, such as the widely used HTML, have pre-defined presentation semantics, meaning that their specifications prescribe some aspects of how to present the structured data on particular media. HTML, like DocBook, Open eBook, JATS, and many others, is based on the markup metalanguages XML and SGML. That is, SGML and XML allow designers to specify particular schemas, which determine which elements, attributes, and other features are permitted, and where.\nA key characteristic of most markup languages is that they allow combining markup with content such as text and pictures. For example, if a few words in a sentence need to be emphasized, or identified as a proper name, defined term, or another special item, the markup may be inserted between the characters of the sentence. \nEtymology.\nThe word \"markup\" is derived from the traditional publishing practice of \"marking up\" a manuscript, which involves adding handwritten annotations in the form of conventional symbolic printer's instructions\u2014in the margins and text of a paper or printed manuscript. \nFor centuries, this task was done primarily by skilled typographers known as \"markup men\" or \"markers\" who marked up text to indicate what typeface, style, and size should be applied to each part, and then passed the manuscript to others for typesetting by hand or machine. \nThe markup was also commonly applied by editors, proofreaders, publishers, and graphic designers, and by authors themselves, all of whom might also mark things such as corrections and changes.\nTypes.\nThere are three general categories of electronic markup, articulated by James Coombs, Allen Renear, and Steven DeRose in 1987, and Tim Bray in 2003.\nPresentational markup.\nPresentational markup is used by traditional word-processing systems. Binary codes embedded within document text produce the WYSIWYG ('what you see is what you get') effect. Such markup is usually hidden from human users, even authors and editors. Such systems use procedural and descriptive markup internally but convert them to present the user with formatted arrangements of type.\nProcedural markup.\nMarkup is embedded in text which provides instructions for programs to process the text. Well-known examples include troff, TeX, and Markdown. Generally, software processes the text sequentially from beginning to end, following the instructions as encountered. Such text is often edited with the markup visible and directly manipulated by the author. Popular procedural markup systems usually include programming constructs, especially macros, allowing complex sets of instructions to be invoked by a simple name (and perhaps a few parameters). This is much faster, less error-prone, and more maintenance-friendly than re-stating the same or similar instructions in many places.\nDescriptive markup.\nDescriptive markup is specifically used to describe parts of the document for what they are, rather than how they should be processed. Well-known systems that provide many such labels include LaTeX, HTML, and XML. The objective is to decouple the structure of the document from any particular treatment or rendition of it. Such markup is often described as \"semantic\". An example of a descriptive markup is HTML's codice_1 tag, which is used to label a citation. Descriptive markup\u2014sometimes called \"logical markup\" or \"conceptual markup\"\u2014encourages authors to write in a way that describes the material conceptually, rather than visually.\nThere is considerable overlap and concurrent use of markup types. In modern word-processing systems, presentational markup is often saved in descriptive-markup-oriented systems such as XML, and then processed procedurally by implementations. The programming in procedural-markup systems, such as TeX, may be used to create higher-level markup systems that are more descriptive in nature, such as LaTeX.\nIn recent years, several markup languages have been developed with ease of use as a key goal, and without input from standards organizations, aimed at allowing authors to create formatted text via web browsers, for example in wikis and web forums. These are sometimes called lightweight markup languages. Markdown, BBCode, and the markup language used by Wikipedia are examples of such languages.\nHistory.\nGenCode.\nThe first well-known public presentation of markup languages in computer text processing was made by William W. Tunnicliffe at a conference in 1967, although he preferred to call it \"generic coding.\" It can be seen as a response to the emergence of processing programs such as RUNOFF that each used their own control notation, often specific to the target typesetting device. In the 1970s, Tunnicliffe led the development of a standard called GenCode for the publishing industry. Book designer Stanley Rice published speculation along similar lines in 1970.\nBrian Reid, in his 1980 dissertation at Carnegie Mellon University, developed a theory and working implementation of descriptive markup in actual use. However, IBM researcher Charles Goldfarb is more commonly considered the inventor of markup languages. Goldfarb developed the basic idea while working on a primitive document management system intended for law firms in 1969, and helped invent IBM's Generalized Markup Language (GML) later that same year. GML was first publicly disclosed in 1973.\nIn 1975, Goldfarb moved from Cambridge, Massachusetts to Silicon Valley and became a product planner at the IBM Almaden Research Center. There, he convinced IBM's executives to deploy GML commercially in 1978 as part of IBM's Document Composition Facility product, and it was widely used in business within a few years.\nStandard Generalized Markup Language (SGML), the first standard descriptive markup language, was based on both GML and GenCode. It was the result of an International Organization for Standardization (ISO) committee that was first chaired by Tunnicliffe, and which Goldfarb also worked on beginning in 1974. Goldfarb eventually became chair of the committee. SGML was first released by ISO as the ISO 8879 standard in October 1986.\ntroff and nroff.\nSome early examples of computer markup languages available outside the publishing industry can be found in typesetting tools on Unix systems such as troff and nroff. In these systems, formatting commands were inserted into the document text so that typesetting software could format the text according to the editor's specifications. It was a trial and error iterative process to correctly print a document. The availability of WYSIWYG publishing software supplanted much use of these languages among casual users, though professional publishing work still uses markup to specify the non-visual structure of texts, and WYSIWYG editors now usually save documents in a markup-language-based format.\nTeX.\nAnother major publishing standard is TeX, created and refined by Donald Knuth in the 1970s and 1980s. TeX concentrated on the detailed layout of text and font descriptions to typeset mathematical books. This required Knuth to spend considerable time investigating the art of typesetting. TeX is mainly used in academia, where it is a \"de facto\" standard in many scientific disciplines. A TeX macro package known as LaTeX provides a descriptive markup system on top of TeX, and is widely used both among the scientific community and the publishing industry.\nScribe, GML, and SGML.\nThe first language to make a clear distinction between structure and presentation was Scribe, developed by Brian Reid and described in his doctoral thesis in 1980. Scribe was revolutionary in a number of ways, introducing the idea of styles separated from the marked-up document, and a grammar that controlled the usage of descriptive elements. Scribe influenced the development of GML and later SGML, and is a direct ancestor to HTML and LaTeX.\nIn the early 1980s, the idea that markup should focus on the structural aspects of a document and leave the visual presentation of that structure to the interpreter led to the creation of SGML. The language was developed by a committee chaired by Goldfarb. It incorporated ideas from many different sources, including Tunnicliffe's project, GenCode. Sharon Adler, Anders Berglund, and James A. Marke were also key members of the SGML committee.\nSGML specifies a syntax for including the markup in documents, as well as one for separately describing what tags are allowed, and where (the document type definition (DTD), later known as a schema). This allows authors to create and use any markup they want, selecting tags that make the most sense to them and are named in their own natural languages, while also allowing automated verification. Thus, SGML is properly a metalanguage, and many markup languages are derived from it. From the late 1980s onward, most substantial new markup languages have been based on SGML, including the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) guidelines and DocBook. SGML was promulgated as the ISO 8879 standard in 1986.\nSGML found wide acceptance and use in fields with very large-scale documentation requirements. However, many found it cumbersome and difficult to learn\u2014a side effect of its design attempting to do too much and being too flexible. For example, SGML made end tags (or start tags, or both) optional in certain contexts, because its developers thought markup would be done manually by overworked support staff who would appreciate saving keystrokes.\nHTML.\nIn 1989, computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee wrote a memo proposing an Internet-based hypertext system, then specified HTML and wrote the browser and server software in late 1990. The first publicly available description of HTML was a document called \"HTML Tags\", first mentioned on the Internet by Berners-Lee in late 1991. It describes 18 elements comprising the initial, relatively simple design of HTML. Except for the hyperlink tag, these were strongly influenced by SGMLguid, an in-house SGML-based documentation format at CERN, and very similar to the sample schema in the SGML standard. Eleven of these elements still exist in HTML 4.\nBerners-Lee considered HTML an SGML application. The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) formally defined it as such with the mid-1993 publication of the first proposal for an HTML specification: \"Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)\" by Berners-Lee and Dan Connolly, which included an SGML DTD to define the grammar. Many of the HTML text elements are found in the 1988 ISO technical report \"TR 9537 Techniques for using SGML\", which in turn covers the features of early text formatting languages, such as that used by the RUNOFF command developed in the early 1960s for the Compatible Time-Sharing System operating system. These formatting commands were derived from those used by typesetters to manually format documents. Steven DeRose argues that HTML's use of descriptive markup (and the influence of SGML in particular) was a major factor in the success of the Web, because of the flexibility and extensibility that it enabled. HTML became the main markup language for creating web pages and other information that can be displayed in a web browser and is likely the most used markup language in the world in the 21st century.\nXML.\nXML (Extensible Markup Language) is a widely-used meta markup language. It was developed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) in a committee created and chaired by Jon Bosak. The main purpose of XML was to simplify SGML by focusing on a particular use case\u2014documents on the Internet. XML remains a metalanguage like SGML, allowing users to create any tags needed (hence \"extensible\") and then describing those tags and their permitted uses.\nXML adoption was hastened by the fact that every XML document can be written so that it is also an SGML document, allowing existing SGML users and software to switch to XML fairly easily. At the same time, XML eliminates many complex features of SGML to simplify implementation environments such as documents and publications. It appears to balance simplicity and flexibility, as well as support very robust schema definitions and validation tools, and was rapidly adopted for many uses. XML is now widely used for communicating data between applications, serializing program data, for hardware communication protocols, vector graphics, and other uses besides documents.\nXHTML.\nFrom January 2000 until HTML 5 was released, all W3C recommendations for HTML were based on XML, using XHTML (Extensible HyperText Markup Language). The language specification requires that XHTML documents be \"well-formed\" XML documents. This allows for more rigorous and robust documents, by avoiding many syntax errors which historically led to unwanted browser behavior, while still using document components familiar to HTML users.\nOne of the most noticeable differences between HTML and XHTML is the latter's rule that \"all tags must be closed\": empty HTML tags such as codice_2 must either be \"closed\" with a regular end-tag, or replaced by a special form: codice_3 (the space before the slash on the end tag is optional but frequently used, because it enables some pre-XML web browsers and SGML parsers to accept the tag). Another difference is that all attribute values in tags must be quoted. Both these differences are commonly criticized as verbose but also praised because they make it far easier to detect, localize, and repair errors. Finally, all tag and attribute names within the XHTML namespace must be lowercase to be valid. HTML, on the other hand, was case-insensitive.\nOther XML-based applications.\nMany XML-based applications exist, including the Resource Description Framework as RDF/XML, XForms, DocBook, SOAP, and the Web Ontology Language (OWL). For a partial list of these, see list of XML markup languages.\nFeatures.\nA common feature of many markup languages is that they intermix the text of a document with markup instructions in the same data stream or file. This is not necessary; it is possible to isolate markup from text content, using pointers, offsets, IDs, or other methods to coordinate the two. Such \"standoff\" markup is typical for the internal representations that programs use to work with marked-up documents. However, \"embedded\" or \"inline\" markup is much more common elsewhere. For example, the following is a small section of text marked up in HTML:\n&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;\n&lt;html&gt;\n &lt;head&gt;\n &lt;meta charset=\"utf-8\"&gt;\n &lt;title&gt;My test page&lt;/title&gt;\n &lt;/head&gt;\n &lt;body&gt;\n &lt;h1&gt;Mozilla is cool&lt;/h1&gt;\n &lt;img src=\"images/firefox-icon.png\" alt=\"The Firefox logo: a flaming fox surrounding the Earth.\"&gt;\n &lt;p&gt;At Mozilla, we\u2019re a global community of&lt;/p&gt;\n &lt;ul&gt; &lt;!-- changed to list in the tutorial --&gt;\n &lt;li&gt;technologists&lt;/li&gt;\n &lt;li&gt;thinkers&lt;/li&gt;\n &lt;li&gt;builders&lt;/li&gt;\n &lt;/ul&gt;\n &lt;p&gt;working together to keep the Internet alive and accessible, so people worldwide can be informed contributors and creators of the Web. We believe this act of human collaboration across an open platform is essential to individual growth and our collective future.&lt;/p&gt;\n &lt;p&gt;Read the &lt;a href=\"https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/manifesto/\"&gt;Mozilla Manifesto&lt;/a&gt; to learn even more about the values and principles that guide the pursuit of our mission.&lt;/p&gt;\n &lt;/body&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;\nThe codes enclosed in angle-brackets codice_4 are markup instructions (known as \"tags\"), while the text between these instructions is the actual text of the document. The codes codice_5, codice_6, and codice_7 are examples of \"semantic\" markup, in that they describe the intended purpose or the meaning of the text they include. Specifically, codice_5 means the enclosed text is a \"first-level heading\", codice_6 means a \"paragraph\", and codice_7 means an \"emphasized\" word or phrase. A program interpreting such structural markup may apply its own rules or styles for presenting the various pieces of text, using different typefaces, boldness, font size, indentation, color, or other styles, as desired. For example, a tag such as codice_5 might be presented in a large bold sans-serif typeface in an article, or it might be underscored in a monospaced (fixed-width font) document, or it might not change the presentation at all.\nIn contrast, the codice_12 tag in HTML 4 is an example of \"presentational\" markup, which is generally used to specify a characteristic of the text without specifying the reason for that appearance. In this case, the codice_12 element dictates the use of an italic typeface. However, in HTML 5, this element has been repurposed with a more semantic usage: to denote \"a span of text in an alternate voice or mood, or otherwise offset from the normal prose in a manner indicating a different quality of text\". For example, it is appropriate to use the codice_12 element to indicate a taxonomic designation or a phrase in another language. The change was made to ease the transition from HTML 4 to 5 as smoothly as possible so that deprecated uses of presentational elements would preserve the most likely intended meaning.\nTEI has published extensive guidelines for how to encode texts of interest in the humanities and social sciences, developed through years of international cooperative work. These guidelines are used for encoding historical documents, and the works of particular scholars, periods, and genres.\nBroader use.\nWhile the idea of markup language originated with text documents, they are increasingly used in the presentation of other types of information, including playlists, vector graphics, web services, content syndication, and user interfaces. Most of these are XML applications because XML is a well-defined and extensible language.\nThe use of XML has also led to the possibility of combining multiple markup languages into a single profile, like XHTML+SMIL and XHTML+MathML+SVG.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18912", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18912", "title": "Lower case", "text": ""}
{"id": "18913", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18913", "title": "Mojo Jojo", "text": ""}
{"id": "18914", "revid": "30468261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18914", "title": "Mathematical expression", "text": ""}
{"id": "18916", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18916", "title": "Meaning", "text": "Meaning most commonly refers to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMeaning may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18917", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18917", "title": "Metaethics", "text": "Branch of ethics seeking to understand ethical properties\nIn metaphilosophy and ethics, metaethics is the study of the nature, scope, ground, and meaning of moral judgment, ethical belief, or values. It is one of the three branches of ethics generally studied by philosophers, the others being normative ethics (questions of how one ought to be and act) and applied ethics (practical questions of right behavior in given, usually contentious, situations).\nWhile normative ethics addresses such questions as \"What should I do?\", evaluating specific practices and principles of action, metaethics addresses questions about the nature of goodness, how one can discriminate good from evil, and what the proper account of moral knowledge is. Similar to accounts of knowledge generally, the threat of skepticism about the possibility of moral knowledge and cognitively meaningful moral propositions often motivates positive accounts in metaethics. Another distinction is often made between the nature of questions related to each: first-order (substantive) questions belong to the domain of normative ethics, whereas metaethics addresses second-order (formal) questions.\nSome theorists argue that a metaphysical account of morality is necessary for the proper evaluation of actual moral theories and for making practical moral decisions; others reason from opposite premises and suggest that studying moral judgments about proper actions can guide us to a true account of the nature of morality.\nMetaethical questions.\nAccording to Richard Garner and Bernard Rosen, there are three kinds of metaethical problems, or three general questions:\nGarner and Rosen say that answers to the three basic questions \"are not unrelated, and sometimes an answer to one will strongly suggest, or perhaps even entail, an answer to another.\" A metaethical theory, unlike a normative ethical theory, does not attempt to evaluate specific choices as being better, worse, good, bad, or evil; although it may have profound implications as to the validity and meaning of normative ethical claims. An answer to any of the three example questions above would not itself be a normative ethical statement.\nMoral semantics.\nMoral semantics attempts to answer the question, \"What is the meaning of moral terms or judgments?\" Answers may have implications for answers to the other two questions as well.\nCognitivist theories.\n\"Cognitivist\" theories hold that evaluative moral sentences express propositions (i.e., they are 'truth-apt' or 'truth bearers', capable of being true or false), as opposed to non-cognitivism. Most forms of cognitivism hold that some such propositions are true (including moral realism and ethical subjectivism), as opposed to error theory, which asserts that all are erroneous.\nMoral realism.\nMoral realism (in the \"robust\" sense; see moral universalism for the minimalist sense) holds that such propositions are about \"robust\" or mind-independent facts, that is, not facts about any person or group's subjective opinion, but about objective features of the world. Metaethical theories are commonly categorized as either a form of realism or as one of three forms of \"anti-realism\" regarding moral facts: ethical subjectivism, error theory, or non-cognitivism. Realism comes in two main varieties:\nEthical subjectivism.\nEthical subjectivism is one form of moral anti-realism. It holds that moral statements are made true or false by the attitudes and/or conventions of people, either those of each society, those of each individual, or those of some particular individual. Most forms of ethical subjectivism are relativist, but there are notable forms that are universalist:\nError theory.\nError theory, another form of moral anti-realism, holds that although ethical claims do express propositions, all such propositions are false, as the properties discussed don't exist (moral goodness, virtue, evil, etc). Thus, both the statement \"Murder is morally wrong\" and the statement \"Murder is morally permissible\" are false, according to error theory. J. L. Mackie is the best-known proponent of this view. Since error theory denies that there are moral truths, error theory entails moral nihilism and, thus, moral skepticism; however, neither moral nihilism nor moral skepticism conversely entail error theory.\nNon-cognitivist theories.\nNon-cognitivist theories hold that ethical sentences are neither true nor false because they do not express genuine propositions. Non-cognitivism is another form of moral anti-realism. Most forms of non-cognitivism are also forms of expressivism, however some such as Mark Timmons and Terrence Horgan distinguish the two and allow the possibility of cognitivist forms of expressivism. Non-cognitivism includes:\nCentralism and non-centralism.\nYet another way of categorizing metaethical theories is to distinguish between centralist and non-centralist moral theories. The debate between centralism and non-centralism revolves around the relationship between the so-called \"thin\" and \"thick\" concepts of morality: thin moral concepts are those such as good, bad, right, and wrong; thick moral concepts are those such as courageous, inequitable, just, or dishonest. While both sides agree that the thin concepts are more general and the thick more specific, centralists hold that the thin concepts are antecedent to the thick ones and that the latter are therefore dependent on the former. That is, centralists argue that one must understand words like \"right\" and \"ought\" before understanding words like \"just\" and \"unkind.\" Non-centralism rejects this view, holding that thin and thick concepts are on par with one another and even that the thick concepts are a sufficient starting point for understanding the thin ones.\nNon-centralism has been of particular importance to ethical naturalists in the late 20th and early 21st centuries as part of their argument that normativity is a non-excisable aspect of language and that there is no way of analyzing thick moral concepts into a purely descriptive element attached to a thin moral evaluation, thus undermining any fundamental division between facts and norms. Allan Gibbard, R. M. Hare, and Simon Blackburn have argued in favor of the fact/norm distinction, meanwhile, with Gibbard going so far as to argue that, even if conventional English has only mixed normative terms (that is, terms that are neither purely descriptive nor purely normative), we could develop a nominally English metalanguage that still allowed us to maintain the division between factual descriptions and normative evaluations.\nMoral ontology.\nMoral ontology attempts to answer the question, \"What is the nature of moral judgments?\"\nAmongst those who believe there to be some standard(s) of morality (as opposed to moral nihilists), there are two divisions:\nMoral universalism.\nMoral universalism (or universal morality) is the metaethical position that some system of ethics, or a universal ethic, applies universally, that is to all intelligent beings regardless of culture, race, sex, religion, nationality, sexuality, or other distinguishing feature. The source or justification of this system may be thought to be, for instance, human nature, shared vulnerability to suffering, the demands of universal reason, what is common among existing moral codes, or the common mandates of religion (although it can be argued that the latter is not in fact moral universalism because it may distinguish between Gods and mortals). Moral universalism is the opposing position to various forms of moral relativism.\nUniversalist theories are generally forms of moral realism, though exceptions exists, such as the subjectivist ideal observer and divine command theories, and the non-cognitivist universal prescriptivism of R. M. Hare. Forms of moral universalism include:\nMoral relativism.\nMoral relativism maintains that all moral judgments have their origins either in societal or in individual standards, and that no single standard exists by which one can objectively assess the truth of a moral proposition. Metaethical relativists, in general, believe that the descriptive properties of terms such as \"good\", \"bad\", \"right\", and \"wrong\" do not stand subject to universal truth conditions, but only to societal convention and personal preference. Given the same set of verifiable facts, some societies or individuals will have a fundamental disagreement about what one \"ought\" to do based on societal or individual norms, and one cannot adjudicate these using some independent standard of evaluation. The latter standard will always be societal or personal and not universal, unlike, for example, the scientific standards for assessing temperature or for determining mathematical truths. \nMoral nihilism.\nMoral nihilism, also known as ethical nihilism, is the metaethical view that nothing has intrinsic moral value. For example, a moral nihilist would say that killing someone, for whatever reason, is intrinsically neither morally right nor morally wrong. Moral nihilism must be distinguished from moral relativism, which does allow for moral statements to be intrinsically true or false in a non-universal sense, but does not assign any static truth-values to moral statements. Insofar as only true statements can be known, moral nihilists are moral skeptics. Most forms of moral nihilism are non-cognitivist and vice versa, though there are notable exceptions such as universal prescriptivism (which is semantically non-cognitive but substantially universal).\nMoral epistemology.\nMoral epistemology is the study of moral knowledge. It attempts to answer such questions as, \"How may moral judgments be supported or defended?\" and \"Is moral knowledge possible?\"\nIf one presupposes a cognitivist interpretation of moral sentences, morality is justified by the moralist's knowledge of moral facts, and the theories to justify moral judgements are epistemological theories. Most moral epistemologies posit that moral knowledge is somehow possible (including empiricism and moral rationalism), as opposed to moral skepticism. Amongst them, there are those who hold that moral knowledge is gained inferentially on the basis of some sort of non-moral epistemic process, as opposed to ethical intuitionism.\nMoral knowledge gained by inference.\nEmpiricism.\nEmpiricism is the doctrine that knowledge is gained primarily through observation and experience. Metaethical theories that imply an empirical epistemology include:\nThere are exceptions within subjectivism however, such as ideal observer theory, which implies that moral facts may be known through a rational process, and individualist ethical subjectivism, which holds that moral facts are merely personal opinions and so may be known only through introspection. Empirical arguments for ethics run into the \"is-ought\" problem, which asserts that the way the world \"is\" cannot alone instruct people how they \"ought\" to act.\nMoral rationalism.\nMoral rationalism, also called ethical rationalism, is the view according to which moral truths (or at least general moral principles) are knowable \"a priori\", by reason alone. Plato and Immanuel Kant, prominent figures in the history of philosophy, defended moral rationalism. David Hume and Friedrich Nietzsche are two figures in the history of philosophy who have rejected moral rationalism.\nRecent philosophers who defended moral rationalism include R. M. Hare, Christine Korsgaard, Alan Gewirth, and Michael Smith. A moral rationalist may adhere to any number of different semantic theories as well; moral realism is compatible with rationalism, and the subjectivist ideal observer theory and non-cognitivist universal prescriptivism both entail it.\nEthical intuitionism.\nEthical intuitionism is the view according to which some moral truths can be known \"without\" inference. That is, the view is at its core a foundationalism about moral beliefs. Such an epistemological view implies that there are moral beliefs with propositional contents; so it implies cognitivism. Ethical intuitionism commonly suggests moral realism, the view that there are objective facts of morality and, to be more specific, ethical non-naturalism, the view that these evaluative facts cannot be reduced to natural fact. However, neither moral realism nor ethical non-naturalism are essential to the view; most ethical intuitionists simply happen to hold those views as well. Ethical intuitionism comes in both a \"rationalist\" variety, and a more \"empiricist\" variety known as moral sense theory.\nMoral skepticism.\nMoral skepticism is the class of metaethical theories all members of which entail that no one has any moral knowledge. Many moral skeptics also make the stronger, modal, claim that moral knowledge is impossible. Forms of moral skepticism include, but are not limited to, error theory and most but not all forms of non-cognitivism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18919", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18919", "title": "Mannerism/Art", "text": ""}
{"id": "18921", "revid": "561624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18921", "title": "Montesquieu (disambiguation)", "text": "Montesquieu (1689\u20131755) was a French lawyer, man of letters, and political philosopher.\nMontesquieu may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18925", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18925", "title": "Mormons", "text": "Religious group; part of the Latter Day Saint movement\nMormons are a religious and cultural group related to Mormonism, the principal branch of the Latter Day Saint movement started by Joseph Smith in upstate New York during the Second Great Awakening. After Smith's death in 1844, the movement split into several groups following different leaders; the majority followed Brigham Young, while smaller groups followed Sidney Rigdon and James Strang. Many who did not follow Young eventually merged into the Community of Christ, led by Smith\u2019s son, Joseph Smith III. The term \"Mormon\" typically refers to members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), the largest branch, which followed Brigham Young. People who identify as Mormons may also be independently religious, secular, and non-practicing or belong to other denominations. \nSince 2018, the LDS Church has expressed the desire that its followers be referred to as \"members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints\", or just \"members\", if the identity of the church is made clear previously in the context, as the term \"Mormon\" can be considered offensive by the community.\nMembers have developed a strong sense of community that stems from their doctrine and history. One of the central doctrinal issues that defined Mormonism in the 19th century was the practice of plural marriage, a form of religious polygamy. From 1852 until 1904, when the LDS Church banned the practice, many members who had followed Brigham Young to the Utah Territory openly practiced polygamy. Members dedicate significant time and resources to serving in their churches. A prominent practice among young and retired members of the LDS Church is to serve a full-time proselytizing mission. Members have a health code that eschews alcoholic beverages, tobacco, tea, coffee, and addictive substances. They tend to be very family-oriented and have strong connections across generations and with extended family, reflecting their belief that families can be sealed together beyond death. Members also adhere to a law of chastity, requiring abstention from sexual relations outside heterosexual marriage and fidelity within marriage.\nMormons identify as Christian, but some non-Mormons consider church members to be non-Christian because some of their beliefs differ from those of Nicene Christianity. They believe that Christ's church was restored through Joseph Smith and is guided by living prophets and apostles. Members believe in the Bible and other books of scripture, such as the Book of Mormon. They have a unique view of cosmology and believe that all people are literal spirit children of God: they believe that returning to God requires following the example of Jesus Christ and accepting his atonement through repentance and ordinances such as baptism.\nDuring the 19th century, converts into LDS Church tended to gather in a central geographic location, a trend that reversed somewhat in the 1920s and 1930s. The center of LDS Church cultural influence is in Utah, and North America has more members than any other continent, although about 60% of LDS Church members live outside the United States. As of December 31, 2021, the LDS Church reported a membership of 16,805,400.\nTerminology.\nThe terminology preferred by the church itself has varied over time. At various points, the church has embraced the term \"Mormon\" and stated that other sects within the shared faith tradition should not be called Mormon.\nThe word Mormon was initially coined to describe any person who considers the Book of Mormon to be a scripture volume. Mormonite and Mormon were originally descriptive terms used both by outsiders to the faith, church members, and occasionally church leaders. The term Mormon later was sometimes used derogatorily; such use may have developed during the 1838 Mormon War, although church members and leaders \"embraced the term\", according to church historian Matthew Bowman, and by the end of the 1800s it was broadly used.\nThe LDS Church has made efforts, including in 1982, in 2001 prior to the 2002 Salt Lake City Olympics, in 2011 after \"The Book of Mormon\" appeared on Broadway, and again in 2018, to encourage the use of the church's full name, rather than the terms Mormon or LDS. According to Patrick Mason, chair of Mormon studies at Claremont Graduate University and Richard Bennett, a professor of church history at Brigham Young University, this is because non-church members have historically been confused about whether it represents a Christian faith, which concerns church leaders, who want to emphasize that the church is a Christian church. The term Mormon also causes concern for church leaders because it has been used to include splinter groups such as Fundamentalist Latter Day Saints, who practice polygamy, which the LDS Church does not; Mason said \"For more than 100 years, the mainstream LDS Church has gone to great pains to distance itself from those who practice polygamy. It doesn't want to have any confusion there between those two groups.\"\nIn 2018, the LDS Church published a style guide that encourages the use of the terms \"the Church\", the \"Church of Jesus Christ\" or the \"restored Church of Jesus Christ\" as shortened versions after an initial use of the full name. According to church historian Bowman, 'the term \"restored\" refers to the idea that the original Christian religion is obsolete, and Mormons alone are practicing true Christianity.'\nThe 2018 style guide rejects the term Mormons along with \"Mormon Church\", \"Mormonism\", and the abbreviation LDS. The second-largest sect, the Community of Christ, also rejects the term Mormon due to its association with the practice of polygamy among Brighamite sects. Other sects, including several fundamentalist branches of the Brighamite tradition, embrace the term \"Mormon\".\nHistory.\nThe history of the Mormons has shaped them into a people with a strong sense of unity and commonality. From the start, Mormons have tried to establish what they call \"Zion\", a utopian society of the righteous.\nMormon history can be divided into three broad periods: (1) the early history during the lifetime of Joseph Smith, (2) a \"pioneer era\" under the leadership of Brigham Young and his successors, and (3) a modern era beginning around the turn of the 20th century. In the first period, Smith attempted to build a city called Zion, where converts could gather. Zion became a \"landscape of villages\" in Utah during the pioneer era. In modern times, Zion is still an ideal, though Mormons gather together in their individual congregations rather than in a central geographic location.\nBeginnings.\nThe Mormon movement began with the publishing of the Book of Mormon in March 1830, which Smith stated was a translation of golden plates containing the religious history of an ancient American civilization that the ancient prophet-historian Mormon had compiled. Smith stated that an angel had directed him to the golden plates buried in the Hill Cumorah. On April 6, 1830, Smith founded the Church of Christ. In 1832, Smith added an account of a vision he had sometime in the early 1820s while living in Upstate New York. Some Mormons regarded this vision as the most important event in human history after the birth, ministry, and resurrection of Jesus Christ.\nThe early church grew westward as Smith sent missionaries to proselytize. In 1831, the church moved to Kirtland, Ohio, where missionaries had made a large number of converts and Smith began establishing an outpost in Jackson County, Missouri, where he planned to eventually build the city of Zion (or the New Jerusalem). In 1833, Missouri settlers, alarmed by the rapid influx of Mormons, expelled them from Jackson County into the nearby Clay County, where local residents were more welcoming.\nAfter Smith led a mission, known as Zion's Camp, to recover the land, he began building Kirtland Temple in Lake County, Ohio, where the church flourished. When the Missouri Mormons were later asked to leave Clay County in 1836, they secured land in what would become Caldwell County.\nThe Kirtland era ended in 1838 after the failure of a church-sponsored anti-bank caused widespread defections, and Smith regrouped with the remaining church in Far West, Missouri. During the fall of 1838, tensions escalated into the Mormon War with the old Missouri settlers. On October 27, the governor of Missouri ordered that the Mormons \"must be treated as enemies\" and be exterminated or driven from the state. Between November and April, some eight thousand displaced Mormons migrated east into Illinois.\nIn 1839, the Mormons purchased the small town of Commerce, converted swampland on the banks of the Mississippi River, renamed the area Nauvoo, Illinois, and began constructing the Nauvoo Temple. The city became the church's new headquarters and gathering place, and it grew rapidly, fueled in part by converts immigrating from Europe. Meanwhile, Smith introduced temple ceremonies meant to seal families together for eternity, as well as the doctrines of eternal progression or exaltation and plural marriage.\nSmith created a service organization for women called the Relief Society and the Council of Fifty, representing a future theodemocratic \"Kingdom of God\" on the earth. Smith also published the story of his First Vision, in which the Father and the Son appeared to him when he was about 14 years old. This vision would come to be regarded by some Mormons as the most important event in human history after the birth, ministry, and resurrection of Jesus Christ.\nIn 1844, local prejudices and political tensions, fueled by Mormon peculiarity, internal dissent, and reports of polygamy, escalated into conflicts between Mormons and \"anti-Mormons\" in Illinois and Missouri. Smith was arrested, and on June 27, 1844, he and his brother Hyrum were killed by a mob in Carthage, Illinois. Because Hyrum was Smith's logical successor, their deaths caused a succession crisis, and Brigham Young assumed leadership over most Latter Day Saints. Young had been a close associate of Smith's and was the senior apostle of the Quorum of the Twelve. Smaller groups of Latter-Day Saints followed other leaders to form other denominations of the Latter Day Saint movement.\nPioneer era.\nFor two years after Joseph Smith's death, conflicts escalated between Mormons and other Illinois residents. To prevent war, Brigham Young led the Mormon pioneers (constituting most of the Latter Day Saints) to a temporary winter quarters in Nebraska and then, eventually (beginning in 1847), to what became the Utah Territory. Having failed to build Zion within the confines of American society, the Mormons began to construct a society in isolation based on their beliefs and values. The cooperative ethic that Mormons had developed over the last decade and a half became important as settlers branched out and colonized a large desert region now known as the Mormon Corridor. Colonizing efforts were seen as religious duties, and the new villages were governed by the Mormon bishops (local lay religious leaders). The Mormons viewed land as a commonwealth, devising and maintaining a cooperative system of irrigation that allowed them to build a farming community in the desert.\nFrom 1849 to 1852, the Mormons greatly expanded their missionary efforts, establishing several missions in Europe, Latin America, and the South Pacific. Converts were expected to \"gather\" to Zion, and during Young's presidency (1847\u201377), over seventy thousand Mormon converts immigrated to America. Many of the converts came from England and Scandinavia and were quickly assimilated into the Mormon community. Many of these immigrants crossed the Great Plains in wagons drawn by oxen, while some later groups pulled their possessions in small handcarts. During the 1860s, newcomers began using the new railroad that was under construction.\nIn 1852, church leaders publicized the previously secret practice of plural marriage, a form of polygamy. Over the next 50 years, many Mormons (between 20 and 30 percent of Mormon families) entered into plural marriages as a religious duty, with the number of plural marriages reaching a peak around 1860 and then declining through the rest of the century. Besides the doctrinal reasons for plural marriage, the practice made some economic sense, as many of the plural wives were single women who arrived in Utah without brothers or fathers to offer them societal support.\nBy 1857, tensions had again escalated between Mormons and other Americans, primarily due to accusations involving polygamy and the theocratic rule of the Utah Territory by Brigham Young. In 1857, U.S. President James Buchanan sent an army to Utah, which Mormons interpreted as open aggression against them. Fearing a repeat of Missouri and Illinois, the Mormons prepared to defend themselves, determined to torch their own homes if they were invaded. The Utah War ensued from 1857 to 1858, in which the most notable instance of violence was the Mountain Meadows massacre when leaders of a local Mormon militia ordered the killing of a civilian emigrant party that was traveling through Utah during the escalating tensions. In 1858, Young agreed to step down from his position as governor and was replaced by a non-Mormon, Alfred Cumming. Nevertheless, the LDS Church still wielded significant political power in the Utah Territory.\nAt Young's death in 1877, he was followed by other LDS Church presidents, who resisted efforts by the United States Congress to outlaw Mormon polygamous marriages. In 1878, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in \"Reynolds v. United States\" that religious duty was not a suitable defense for practicing polygamy. Many Mormon polygamists went into hiding; later, Congress began seizing church assets. In September 1890, church president Wilford Woodruff issued a Manifesto that officially suspended the practice of polygamy. Although this Manifesto did not dissolve existing plural marriages, relations with the United States markedly improved after 1890, such that Utah was admitted as a U.S. state in 1896. After the Manifesto, some Mormons continued to enter into polygamous marriages, but these eventually stopped in 1904 when church president Joseph F. Smith disavowed polygamy before Congress and issued a \"Second Manifesto\" calling for all plural marriages in the church to cease. Eventually, the church adopted a policy of excommunicating members found practicing polygamy, and today actively seeks to distance itself from \"fundamentalist\" groups that continue the practice.\nModern times.\nDuring the early 20th century, Mormons began reintegrating into the American mainstream. In 1929, the Mormon Tabernacle Choir began broadcasting a weekly performance on national radio, becoming an asset for public relations. Mormons emphasized patriotism and industry, rising in socioeconomic status from the bottom among American religious denominations to the middle class.\nIn the 1920s and 1930s, Mormons began migrating out of Utah, a trend hurried by the Great Depression, as Mormons looked for work wherever they could find it. As Mormons spread out, church leaders created programs to help preserve the tight-knit community feel of Mormon culture. In addition to weekly worship services, Mormons began participating in numerous programs such as Boy Scouting, a Young Women organization, church-sponsored dances, ward basketball, camping trips, plays, and religious education programs for youth and college students. During the Great Depression, the church started a welfare program to meet the needs of poor members, which has since grown to include a humanitarian branch that provides relief to disaster victims.\nDuring the later half of the 20th century, there was a retrenchment movement in Mormonism in which Mormons became more conservative, attempting to regain their status as a \"peculiar people\".\nThough the 1960s and 1970s brought changes such as Women's Liberation and the civil rights movement, Mormon leaders were alarmed by the erosion of traditional values, the sexual revolution, the widespread use of recreational drugs, moral relativism, and other forces they saw as damaging to the family.\nPartly to counter this, Mormons put an even greater emphasis on family life, religious education, and missionary work, becoming more conservative in the process. As a result, Mormons today are probably less integrated with mainstream society than they were in the early 1960s.\nAlthough black people have been members of Mormon congregations since Joseph Smith's time, before 1978, black membership was small. From 1852 to 1978, the LDS Church enforced a policy restricting men of black African descent from being ordained to the church's lay priesthood. The church was sharply criticized for its policy during the civil rights movement, but the policy remained in force until a 1978 reversal that was prompted in part by questions about mixed-race converts in Brazil. In general, Mormons greeted the change with joy and relief. Since 1978, black membership has grown, and in 1997 there were approximately 500,000 black church members (about 5 percent of the total membership), mostly in Africa, Brazil, and the Caribbean. Black membership has continued to grow substantially, especially in West Africa, where two temples have been built. Some black Mormons are members of the Genesis Group, an organization of black members that predates the priesthood ban and is endorsed by the church.\nThe LDS Church grew rapidly after World War II and became a worldwide organization as missionaries were sent across the globe. The church doubled in size every 15 to 20 years, and by 1996, there were more Mormons outside the United States than inside. In 2012, there were an estimated 14.8\u00a0million Mormons, with roughly 57 percent living outside the United States. It is estimated that approximately 4.5\u00a0million Mormons \u2013 approximately 30% of the total membership \u2013 regularly attend services. A majority of U.S. Mormons are white and non-Hispanic (84 percent). Most Mormons are distributed in North and South America, the South Pacific, and Western Europe. The global distribution of Mormons resembles a contact diffusion model, radiating out from the organization's headquarters in Utah. The church enforces general doctrinal uniformity, congregations on all continents teach the same doctrines, and international Mormons tend to absorb a good deal of Mormon culture, possibly because of the church's top-down hierarchy and missionary presence. However, international Mormons often bring pieces of their own heritage into the church, adapting church practices to local cultures.\nAs of December 2019, the LDS Church reported having 16,565,036 members worldwide. Chile, Uruguay, and several areas in the South Pacific have a higher percentage of Mormons than the United States (which is at about 2 percent). South Pacific countries and dependencies that are more than 10 percent Mormon include American Samoa, the Cook Islands, Kiribati, Niue, Samoa, and Tonga.\nCulture and practices.\nIsolation in Utah had allowed Mormons to create a culture of their own. As the faith spread worldwide, many of its more distinctive practices followed. Mormon converts are urged to undergo lifestyle changes, repent of sins, and adopt sometimes atypical standards of conduct. Practices common to Mormons include studying scriptures, praying daily, fasting regularly, attending Sunday worship services, participating in church programs and activities on weekdays, and refraining from work on Sundays when possible. The most important part of the church services is considered to be the Lord's Supper (commonly called sacrament), in which church members renew covenants made at baptism. Mormons also emphasize standards they believe were taught by Jesus Christ, including personal honesty, integrity, obedience to the law, chastity outside marriage, and fidelity within marriage.\nIn 2010, around 13\u201314 percent of Mormons lived in Utah, the center of cultural influence for Mormonism. Utah Mormons (as well as Mormons living in the Intermountain West) are on average more culturally and politically conservative than those living in some cosmopolitan centers elsewhere in the U.S. Utahns self-identifying as Mormon also attend church somewhat more on average than Mormons living in other states. (Nonetheless, whether they live in Utah or elsewhere in the U.S., Mormons tend to be more culturally and politically conservative than members of other U.S. religious groups.) Utah Mormons often emphasize pioneer heritage more than international Mormons, who generally are not descendants of the Mormon pioneers.\nMormons have a strong sense of communality that stems from their doctrine and history. LDS Church members have a responsibility to dedicate their time and talents to helping the poor and building the church. The church is divided by locality into congregations called \"wards\", with several wards or branches to create a \"stake\". Most church leadership positions are lay positions, and church leaders may work 10 to 15 hours a week in unpaid church service. Observant Mormons also contribute 10 percent of their income to the church as tithing. Paying tithing is one of the prerequisites for entrance into Mormon temples. Many LDS young men, women, and elderly couples choose to serve a proselytizing mission, during which they dedicate all of their time to the church without pay. Members are often involved in humanitarian efforts.\nMormons adhere to the Word of Wisdom, a health law or code that is interpreted as prohibiting the consumption of tobacco, alcohol, coffee and tea, while encouraging the use of herbs, grains, fruits, and a moderate consumption of meat. The Word of Wisdom is also understood to forbid other harmful and addictive substances and practices, such as the use of illegal drugs and abuse of prescription drugs. Mormons are encouraged to keep a year's supplies, including food and financial reserves. Mormons also oppose behaviors such as viewing pornography and gambling.\nThe concept of a united family that lives and progresses forever is at the core of Latter-day Saint doctrine, and Mormons place a high importance on family life. Many Mormons hold weekly Family Home Evenings, in which an evening is set aside for family bonding, study, prayer, and other activities they consider to be wholesome. Latter-day Saint fathers who hold the priesthood typically name and bless their children shortly after birth to formally give the child a name. Mormon parents hope and pray that their children will gain testimonies of the \"gospel\" so they can grow up and marry in temples.\nMormons are encouraged to adhere to the law of chastity, requiring abstention from sexual relations outside opposite-sex marriage and strict fidelity within marriage. All sexual activity (heterosexual and homosexual) outside marriage is considered a grave sin, with marriage recognized as only between a man and a woman. Same-sex marriages are not performed or supported by the LDS Church. Church members are encouraged to marry and have children, and Latter-day Saint families tend to be larger than average. Mormons are opposed to abortion, except in some exceptional circumstances, such as when pregnancy is the result of incest or rape or when the life or health of the mother is in serious jeopardy. Many practicing adult Mormons wear religious undergarments that remind them of covenants and encourage them to dress modestly. Latter-day Saints are counseled not to partake in any form of media that is obscene or pornographic in any way, including media that depicts graphic representations of sex or violence. Tattoos and body piercings are generally discouraged.\nLGBTQ Mormons remain in good standing in the church if they abstain from homosexual relations and obey the law of chastity. While there are no official numbers, LDS Family Services estimates that, on average, four or five members per LDS ward experience same-sex attraction. Gary Watts, former president of Family Fellowship, estimates that only 10 percent of homosexuals stay in the church. Many of these individuals have come forward through different support groups or websites discussing their homosexual attractions and concurrent church membership.\nGroups within Mormonism.\nNote that the categories below are not necessarily mutually exclusive.\nLatter-day Saints (\"LDS\").\nMembers of the LDS Church, also known as Latter-day Saints, constitute over 95 percent of Mormons. The beliefs and practices of LDS Mormons are generally guided by the teachings of LDS Church leaders. However, several smaller groups substantially differ from \"mainstream\" Mormonism in various ways.\nLDS Church members who do not actively participate in worship services or church callings are often called \"less-active\" or \"inactive\" (akin to the qualifying expressions \"non-observant\" or \"non-practicing\" used in relation to members of other religious groups). The LDS Church does not release statistics on church activity, but it is likely that about 40 percent of Mormons in the United States and 30 percent worldwide regularly attend worship services. Reasons for inactivity can include rejection of the fundamental beliefs, history of the church, lifestyle incongruities with doctrinal teachings or problems with social integration. Activity rates tend to vary with age, and disengagement occurs most frequently between age 16 and 25. In 1998, the church reported that most less active members returned to church activity later in life. As of 2017, the LDS Church was losing millennial-age members, a phenomenon not unique to the LDS Church. Former Latter-day Saints who seek to disassociate themselves from the religion are often referred to as ex-Mormons.\nFundamentalist Mormons.\nMembers of sects that broke with the LDS Church over the issue of polygamy have become known as fundamentalist Mormons; these groups differ from mainstream Mormonism primarily in their belief in and practice of plural marriage. There are thought to be between 20,000 and 60,000 members of fundamentalist sects (0.1\u20130.4 percent of Mormons), with roughly half of them practicing polygamy. There are many fundamentalist sects, the largest two being the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (FLDS Church) and the Apostolic United Brethren (AUB). In addition to plural marriage, some of these groups also practice a form of Christian communalism known as the law of consecration or the United Order. The LDS Church seeks to distance itself from all such polygamous groups, excommunicating their members if discovered practicing or teaching it, and today, a majority of Mormon fundamentalists have never been members of the LDS Church.\nLiberal Mormons.\nLiberal Mormons, also known as Progressive Mormons, take an interpretive approach to LDS teachings and scripture. They look to the scriptures for spiritual guidance, but may not necessarily believe the teachings to be literally or uniquely true. For liberal Mormons, revelation is a process through which God gradually brings fallible human beings to greater understanding. A person in this group is sometimes mistakenly regarded by others within the mainstream church as a Jack Mormon, although this term is more commonly used to describe a different group with distinct motives to live the gospel in a non-traditional manner. Liberal Mormons place doing good and loving fellow human beings above the importance of believing correctly. In a separate context, members of small progressive breakaway groups have also adopted the label.\nCultural Mormons.\nCultural Mormons are individuals who may not believe in certain doctrines or practices of the institutional LDS Church yet identify as members of the Mormon ethnic identity. Usually, this is a result of having been raised in the LDS faith or having converted and spent a large portion of one's life as an active member of the LDS Church. Cultural Mormons may or may not be actively involved with the LDS Church. In some cases, they may not be members of the LDS Church.\nBeliefs.\nMormons have a scriptural canon consisting of the Bible (both Old and New Testaments), the Book of Mormon, and a collection of revelations and writings by Joseph Smith known as the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price. Mormons, however, have a relatively open definition of scripture. As a general rule, anything spoken or written by a prophet, while under inspiration, is considered to be the word of God. Thus, the Bible, written by prophets and apostles, is the word of God, so far as it is translated correctly. The Book of Mormon is also believed to have been written by ancient prophets and is viewed as a companion to the Bible. By this definition, the teachings of Smith's successors are also accepted as scripture, though they are always measured against and draw heavily from the scriptural canon.\nMormons believe in \"a friendly universe\" governed by a God whose aim is to bring his children to immortality and eternal life. Mormons have a unique perspective on the nature of God, the origin of man, and the purpose of life. For instance, Mormons believe in a pre-mortal existence where people were literal spirit children of God and that God presented a plan of salvation that would allow his children to progress and become more like him. The plan involved the spirits receiving bodies on earth and going through trials in order to learn, progress, and receive a \"fullness of joy\". The most important part of the plan involved Jesus, the eldest of God's children, coming to earth as the literal Son of God to conquer sin and death so that God's other children could return. According to Mormons, every person who lives on earth will be resurrected, and nearly all of them will be received into various kingdoms of glory. To be accepted into the highest kingdom, a person must fully accept Christ through faith, repentance, and through ordinances such as baptism and the laying on of hands.\nAccording to Mormons, a deviation from the original principles of Christianity, referred to by them as The Great Apostasy, occurred after the ascension of Jesus Christ, marked by the corruption of Christian doctrine by Greek and other philosophies, Members state the martyrdom of the apostles led to a loss of priesthood authority to administer the church and its ordinances.\nMormons believe that God restored the early Christian church through Joseph Smith. In particular, Mormons believe that angels such as Peter, James, John, John the Baptist, Moses, and Elijah appeared to Smith and others and bestowed various priesthood authorities on them. Mormons believe that their church is the \"only true and living church\" because of the divine authority restored through Smith. Mormons self-identify as being Christian, while many Christians, particularly evangelical Protestants, disagree with this view. Mormons view other religions as having portions of the truth, doing good works, and having genuine value.\nThe LDS Church has a top-down hierarchical structure with a president\u2013prophet dictating revelations for the entire church. Lay members are also believed to have access to inspiration and are encouraged to seek their own personal revelations. Mormons see Joseph Smith's First Vision as proof that the heavens are open and that God answers prayers, and place considerable emphasis on asking God to find out if something is true. Most Mormons do not assert to have had heavenly visions like Smith's in response to prayers, but believe God talks to them in their hearts and minds through the Holy Ghost. According to Richard Lyman Bushman, members have some beliefs that are considered strange in a modernized world, but they continue to hold onto their beliefs because they feel God has spoken to them.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18926", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18926", "title": "Manitoba", "text": "Province of Canada\nManitoba is a province of Canada at the longitudinal centre of the country. It is Canada's fifth-most populous province, with a population of 1,342,153 as of 2021. Manitoba has a widely varied landscape, from arctic tundra and the Hudson Bay coastline in the north to dense boreal forest, large freshwater lakes, and prairie grassland in the central and southern regions. Manitoba's capital and largest city is Winnipeg. \nIndigenous peoples have inhabited what is now Manitoba for approximately 10,000 years. In the early 17th century, English and French fur traders began arriving in the area and establishing settlements. The Kingdom of England secured control of the region in 1673 and created a territory named Rupert's Land, which was placed under the administration of the Hudson's Bay Company. Rupert's Land, which included all of present-day Manitoba, grew and evolved from 1673 until 1869 with significant settlements of Indigenous and M\u00e9tis people in the Red River Colony. Negotiations for the creation of the province of Manitoba commenced in 1869, but deep disagreements over the right to self-determination led to an armed conflict, known as the Red River Rebellion, between the federal government and the people (particularly M\u00e9tis) of the Red River Colony. The resolution of the conflict and further negotiations led to Manitoba becoming the fifth province to join Canadian Confederation, when the Parliament of Canada passed the \"Manitoba Act\" on 15 July 1870.\nWinnipeg is the seat of government, home to the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba and the Provincial Court. Four of the province's five universities, all of its professional sports teams, and most of its cultural activities (including Festival du Voyageur and Folklorama) are located in Winnipeg. The city has an international airport as well as train and bus stations; a Canadian Forces base, CFB Winnipeg, operates from the airport and is the regional headquarters of the North American Aerospace Defense Command.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Manitoba\" possibly derives from either Cree or Ojibwe , both meaning 'straits of Manitou, the Great Spirit'. Alternatively, it may be from the Assiniboine , meaning 'Lake of the Prairie' (the lake was known to French explorers as ). The name was chosen by Thomas Spence for the new republic he proposed for the area south of the lake. M\u00e9tis leader Louis Riel preferred the name over the proposed alternative of \"Assiniboia\". It was accepted in Ottawa under the \"Manitoba Act, 1870\".\nHistory.\nIndigenous societies and European settlement.\nModern-day Manitoba was inhabited by the First Nations people shortly after the last ice age glaciers retreated in the southwest about 10,000 years ago; the first exposed land was the Turtle Mountain area. The Ojibwe, Cree, Dene, Sioux, Mandan, and Assiniboine peoples founded settlements, and other tribes entered the area to trade. In Northern Manitoba, quartz was mined to make arrowheads. The first farming in Manitoba was along the Red River, where corn and other seed crops were planted before contact with Europeans.\nIn 1611, Henry Hudson was one of the first Europeans to sail into what is now known as Hudson Bay, where he and some loyal crewmembers were marooned by mutineers. Thomas Button travelled this area in 1612 in an unsuccessful attempt to find and rescue Hudson. When the British ship \"Nonsuch\" sailed into Hudson Bay in 1668\u20131669, she became the first trading vessel to reach the area; that voyage led to the formation of the Hudson's Bay Company, to which the British government gave absolute control of the entire Hudson Bay watershed. This watershed was named Rupert's Land, after Prince Rupert, who helped to subsidize the Hudson's Bay Company. York Factory was founded in 1684 after the original fort of the Hudson's Bay Company, Fort Nelson (built in 1682), was destroyed by rival French traders.\nPierre Gaultier de Varennes, sieur de La V\u00e9rendrye, visited the Red River Valley in the 1730s to help open the area for French exploration and trade. As French explorers entered the area, a Montreal-based company, the North West Company, began trading with the local Indigenous people. Both the North West Company and the Hudson's Bay Company built fur-trading forts; the two companies competed in southern Manitoba, occasionally resulting in violence, until they merged in 1821 (the Hudson's Bay Company Archives in Winnipeg preserve the history of this era).\nGreat Britain secured the territory in 1763 after their victory over France in the North American theatre of the Seven Years' War, better known as the French and Indian War in North America, lasting from 1754 to 1763. The founding of the first agricultural community and settlements in 1812 by Lord Selkirk, north of the area which is now downtown Winnipeg, led to conflict between British colonists and the M\u00e9tis. Twenty colonists, including the governor, and one M\u00e9tis were killed in the Battle of Seven Oaks in 1816.\nConfederation.\nRupert's Land was ceded to Canada by the Hudson's Bay Company in 1869 and incorporated into the Northwest Territories; a lack of attention to M\u00e9tis concerns caused M\u00e9tis leader Louis Riel to establish a local provisional government which formed into the Convention of Forty and the subsequent elected Legislative Assembly of Assiniboia on 9 March 1870. This assembly subsequently sent three delegates to Ottawa to negotiate with the Canadian government. This resulted in the \"Manitoba Act\" and that province's entry into Confederation. Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald introduced the \"Manitoba Act\" in the House of Commons of Canada, the bill was given Royal Assent and Manitoba was brought into Canada as a province in 1870. Louis Riel was pursued by British army officer Garnet Wolseley because of the rebellion, and Riel fled into exile. The Canadian government blocked the M\u00e9tis' attempts to obtain land promised to them as part of Manitoba's entry into confederation. Facing racism from the new flood of white settlers from Ontario, large numbers of M\u00e9tis moved to what would become Saskatchewan and Alberta.\nNumbered Treaties were signed in the late 19th century with the chiefs of First Nations that lived in the area. They made specific promises of land for every family. As a result, a reserve system was established under the jurisdiction of the federal government. The prescribed amount of land promised to the native peoples was not always given; this led Indigenous groups to assert rights to the land through land claims, many of which are still ongoing.\nThe original province of Manitoba was a square one-eighteenth of its current size, and was known colloquially as the \"postage stamp province\". Its borders were expanded in 1881, taking land from the Northwest Territories and the District of Keewatin, but Ontario claimed a large portion of the land; the disputed portion was awarded to Ontario in 1889. Manitoba grew to its current size in 1912, absorbing land from the Northwest Territories to reach 60\u00b0N, uniform with the northern reach of its western neighbours Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia.\nThe Manitoba Schools Question showed the deep divergence of cultural values in the territory. The Catholic Franco-Manitobans had been guaranteed a state-supported separate school system in the original constitution of Manitoba, but a grassroots political movement among English Protestants from 1888 to 1890 demanded the end of French schools. In 1890, the Manitoba legislature passed a law removing funding for French Catholic schools. The French Catholic minority asked the federal government for support; however, the Orange Order and other anti-Catholic forces mobilized nationwide to oppose them. The federal Conservatives proposed remedial legislation to override Manitoba, but they were blocked by the Liberals, led by Wilfrid Laurier. Once elected Prime Minister in 1896, Laurier implemented a compromise stating Catholics in Manitoba could have their own religious instruction for 30 minutes at the end of the day if there were enough students to warrant it, implemented on a school-by-school basis.\nContemporary era.\nBy 1911, Winnipeg was the third largest city in Canada, and remained so until overtaken by Vancouver in the 1920s. A boomtown, it grew quickly around the start of the 20th century, with outside investors and immigrants contributing to its success. The drop in growth in the second half of the decade was a result of the opening of the Panama Canal in 1914, which reduced reliance on transcontinental railways for trade, as well as a decrease in immigration due to the outbreak of the First World War. Over 18,000 Manitoba residents enlisted in the first year of the war; by the end of the war, 14 Manitobans had received the Victoria Cross.\nDuring the First World War, Nellie McClung started the campaign for women's votes. On January 28, 1916, the vote for women was legalized. Manitoba was the first province to allow women to vote in provincial elections. This was two years before Canada as a country granted women the right to vote.\nAfter the First World War ended, severe discontent among farmers (over wheat prices) and union members (over wage rates) resulted in an upsurge of radicalism, coupled with a polarization over the rise of Bolshevism in Russia. The most dramatic result was the Winnipeg general strike of 1919. It began on 15 May and collapsed on 25 June 1919; as the workers gradually returned to their jobs, the Central Strike Committee decided to end the movement. Government efforts to violently crush the strike, including a Royal North-West Mounted Police charge into a crowd of protesters that resulted in multiple casualties and one death, had led to the arrest of the movement's leaders. In the aftermath, eight leaders went on trial, and most were convicted on charges of seditious conspiracy, illegal combinations, and seditious libel; four were deported under the \"Canadian Immigration Act\".\nThe Great Depression (1929 \u2013 c.\u20091939) hit especially hard in Western Canada, including Manitoba. The collapse of the world market combined with a steep drop in agricultural production due to drought led to economic diversification, moving away from a reliance on wheat production. The Manitoba Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, forerunner to the New Democratic Party of Manitoba (NDP), was founded in 1932.\nCanada entered the Second World War in 1939. Winnipeg was one of the major commands for the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan to train fighter pilots, and there were air training schools throughout Manitoba. Several Manitoba-based regiments were deployed overseas, including Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry. In an effort to raise money for the war effort, the Victory Loan campaign organized \"If Day\" in 1942. The event featured a simulated Nazi invasion and occupation of Manitoba, and eventually raised over C$65 million.\nWinnipeg was inundated during the 1950 Red River Flood and had to be partially evacuated. In that year, the Red River reached its highest level since 1861 and flooded most of the Red River Valley. The damage caused by the flood led then-Premier Duff Roblin to advocate for the construction of the Red River Floodway; it was completed in 1968 after six years of excavation. Permanent dikes were erected in eight towns south of Winnipeg, and clay dikes and diversion dams were built in the Winnipeg area. In 1997, the \"Flood of the Century\" caused over C$400 million in damages in Manitoba, but the floodway prevented Winnipeg from flooding.\nIn 1990, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney attempted to pass the Meech Lake Accord, a series of constitutional amendments to persuade Quebec to endorse the \"Canada Act 1982\". Unanimous support in the legislature was needed to bypass public consultation. Cree politician Elijah Harper opposed because he did not believe First Nations had been adequately involved in the Accord's process, and thus the Accord failed.\nGlen Murray, elected in Winnipeg in 1998, became the first openly gay mayor of a large North American city. The province was impacted by major flooding in 2009 and 2011. In 2004, Manitoba became the first province in Canada to ban indoor smoking in public places. In 2013, Manitoba was the second province to introduce accessibility legislation, protecting the rights of persons with disabilities.\nGeography.\nManitoba is bordered by the provinces of Ontario to the east and Saskatchewan to the west, the territory of Nunavut to the north, Northwest Territories at a quadripoint to the northwest, and the US states of North Dakota and Minnesota to the south. Manitoba is at the centre of the Hudson Bay drainage basin, with a high volume of the water draining into Lake Winnipeg and then north down the Nelson River into Hudson Bay. This basin's rivers reach far west to the mountains, far south into the United States, and east into Ontario. Major watercourses include the Red, Assiniboine, Nelson, Winnipeg, Hayes, Whiteshell and Churchill rivers. Most of Manitoba's inhabited south has developed in the prehistoric bed of Glacial Lake Agassiz. This region, particularly the Red River Valley, is flat and fertile; receding glaciers left hilly and rocky areas throughout the province.\nThe province has a saltwater coastline bordering Hudson Bay and more than 110,000 lakes, covering approximately 15.6 percent or of its surface area. Manitoba's major lakes are Lake Manitoba, Lake Winnipegosis, and Lake Winnipeg, the tenth-largest freshwater lake in the world. A total of of traditional First Nations lands and boreal forest on Lake Winnipeg's east side were officially designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site known as Pimachiowin Aki in 2018.\nBaldy Mountain is the province's highest point at above sea level, and the Hudson Bay coast is the lowest at sea level. Riding Mountain, the Pembina Hills, Sandilands Provincial Forest, and the Canadian Shield are also upland regions. Much of the province's sparsely inhabited north and east lie on the irregular granite Canadian Shield, including Whiteshell, Atikaki, and Nopiming Provincial Parks.\nExtensive agriculture is found only in the province's southern areas, although there is grain farming in the Carrot Valley Region (near The Pas). Around 11 per cent of Canada's farmland is in Manitoba.\nClimate.\nManitoba has an extreme continental climate. Temperatures and precipitation generally decrease from south to north and increase from east to west. Manitoba is far from the moderating influences of mountain ranges or large bodies of water. Because of the generally flat landscape, it is exposed to cold Arctic high-pressure air masses from the northwest during January and February. In the summer, air masses sometimes come out of the Southern United States, as warm humid air is drawn northward from the Gulf of Mexico. Temperatures exceed numerous times each summer, and the combination of heat and humidity can bring the humidex value to the mid-40s. Carman, Manitoba, recorded the second-highest humidex ever in Canada in 2007, with 53.0. According to Environment Canada, Manitoba ranked first for clearest skies year round and ranked second for clearest skies in the summer and for the sunniest province in the winter and spring.\nSouthern Manitoba (including the city of Winnipeg), falls into the humid continental climate zone (K\u00f6ppen Dfb). This area is cold and windy in the winter and often has blizzards because of the open landscape. Summers are warm with a moderate length. This region is the most humid area in the prairie provinces, with moderate precipitation. Southwestern Manitoba, though under the same climate classification as the rest of Southern Manitoba, is closer to the semi-arid interior of Palliser's Triangle. The area is drier and more prone to droughts than other parts of southern Manitoba. This area is cold and windy in the winter and has frequent blizzards due to the openness of the Canadian Prairie landscape. Summers are generally warm to hot, with low to moderate humidity.\nSouthern parts of the province, just north of Tornado Alley, experience tornadoes, with 16 confirmed touchdowns in 2016. In 2007, on 22 and 23 June, numerous tornadoes touched down, the largest an F5 tornado that devastated parts of Elie (the strongest recorded tornado in Canada).\nThe province's northern sections (including the city of Thompson) fall in the subarctic climate zone (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfc\"). This region features long and extremely cold winters and brief, warm summers with little precipitation. Overnight temperatures as low as occur on several days each winter.\nFlora and fauna.\nManitoba natural communities may be grouped within five ecozones: boreal plains, prairie, taiga shield, boreal shield and Hudson plains. Three of these\u2014taiga shield, boreal shield and Hudson plain\u2014contain part of the boreal forest of Canada, which covers the province's eastern, southeastern, and northern reaches.\nForests make up about , or 48 percent, of the province's land area. The forests consist of pines (jack, red, eastern white), spruces (white, black), balsam fir, tamarack, poplars (balsam, trembling aspen), birches (white, swamp), and small pockets of eastern white cedar.\nTwo sections of the province are not dominated by forest. The province's northeast corner bordering Hudson Bay is above the treeline and considered tundra. The tallgrass prairie once dominated the south-central and southeastern regions, including the Red River Valley. Mixed grass prairie is found in the southwestern region. Agriculture has replaced much of the natural vegetation, but prairie can still be found in parks and protected areas; some are notable for the presence of the endangered western prairie fringed orchid.\nManitoba is especially noted for its northern polar bear population; Churchill is commonly referred to as the \"Polar Bear Capital\". In the waters off the northern coast of the province are numerous marine species, including the beluga whale. Other populations of animals, including moose, white-tailed deer, mule deer, black and brown bears, coyote, cougar, red fox, Canada lynx, and grey wolf, are distributed throughout the province, especially in the provincial and national parks. There is a large population of red-sided garter snakes near Narcisse; the overwintering dens there are seasonally home to the world's largest concentration of snakes.\nManitoba's bird diversity is enhanced by its position on two major migration routes, with 391 confirmed identified species; 287 of these nest within the province. These include the great grey owl, the province's official bird, and the endangered peregrine falcon.\nManitoba's lakes host 18 species of game fish, particularly species of trout, pike, and goldeye, as well as many smaller fish.\nDemography.\nAt the 2021 census, Manitoba had a population of 1,342,153, more than half of which is in Winnipeg. Although initial colonization of the province revolved mostly around homesteading, the last century has seen a shift towards urbanization; Manitoba is the only Canadian province with over fifty-five percent of its population in a single city.\nThe largest ethnic group in Manitoba is English (16.1%), followed by Scottish (14.5%), German (13.6%), Ukrainian (12.6%), Irish (11.0%), French (9.3%), Canadian (8.4%), Filipino (7.0%), M\u00e9tis (6.8%), Polish (6.0%), First Nations (4.5%), Mennonite (3.9%), Russian (3.7%), Dutch (3.3%), Indian (3.0%), and Icelandic (2.4%). Indigenous peoples (including M\u00e9tis) are Manitoba's fastest-growing ethnic group, representing 13.6 percent of Manitoba's population as of 2001 (some reserves refused to allow census-takers to enumerate their populations or were otherwise incompletely counted). Gimli, Manitoba is home to the largest Icelandic community outside of Iceland.\nAs of the 2021 Canadian Census, the ten most spoken languages in the province included English (1,288,950 or 98.6%), French (111,790 or 8.55%), Tagalog (73,440 or 5.62%), Punjabi (42,820 or 3.28%), German (41,980 or 3.21%), Hindi (26,980 or 2.06%), Spanish (23,435 or 1.79%), Mandarin (16,765 or 1.28%), Cree (16,115 or 1.23%), and Plautdietsch (15,055 or 1.15%). The question on knowledge of languages allows for multiple responses.\nMost Manitobans belong to a Christian denomination: on the 2021 census, 54.2% reported being Christian, followed by 2.7% Sikh, 2.0% Muslim, 1.4% Hindu, 0.9% Jewish, and 0.8% Indigenous spirituality. 36.7% reported no religious affiliation. The largest Christian denominations by number of adherents were the Roman Catholic Church with 21.2%; the United Church of Canada with 5.8%; and the Anglican Church of Canada with 3.3%.\nEconomy.\nManitoba has a moderately strong economy based largely on natural resources. Its Gross Domestic Product was C$50.834\u00a0billion in 2008. The province's economy grew 2.4 percent in 2008, the third consecutive year of growth. The average individual income in Manitoba in 2006 was C$25,100 (compared to a national average of C$26,500), ranking fifth-highest among the provinces. As of October 2009, Manitoba's unemployment rate was 5.8 percent.\nManitoba's economy relies heavily on agriculture, tourism, electricity, oil, mining, and forestry. Agriculture is vital and is found mostly in the southern half of the province, although grain farming occurs as far north as The Pas. The most common agricultural activity is cattle husbandry, followed by assorted grains and oilseed. Manitoba is the nation's largest producer of sunflower seed and dry beans, and one of the leading sources of potatoes. Portage la Prairie is a major potato processing centre. Richardson International, one of the largest oat mills in the world, also has a plant in the municipality.\nManitoba's largest employers are government and government-funded institutions, including crown corporations and services like hospitals and universities. Major private-sector employers are The Great-West Life Assurance Company, Cargill Ltd., and Richardson International. Manitoba also has large manufacturing and tourism sectors. Churchill's Arctic wildlife is a major tourist attraction; the town is a world capital for polar bear and beluga whale watchers. Manitoba is the only province with an Arctic deep-water seaport, at Churchill.\nIn January 2018, the Canadian Federation of Independent Business claimed Manitoba was the most improved province for tackling red tape.\nEconomic history.\nManitoba's early economy depended on mobility and living off the land. Indigenous Nations (Cree, Ojibwa, Dene, Sioux and Assiniboine) followed herds of bison and congregated to trade among themselves at key meeting places throughout the province. After the arrival of the first European traders in the 17th century, the economy centred on the trade of beaver pelts and other furs. Diversification of the economy came when Lord Selkirk brought the first agricultural settlers in 1811, though the triumph of the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) over its competitors ensured the primacy of the fur trade over widespread agricultural colonization.\nHBC control of Rupert's Land ended in 1868; when Manitoba became a province in 1870, all land became the property of the federal government, with homesteads granted to settlers for farming. Transcontinental railways were constructed to simplify trade. Manitoba's economy depended mainly on farming, which persisted until drought and the Great Depression led to further diversification.\nMilitary bases.\nCFB Winnipeg is a Canadian Forces Base at the Winnipeg International Airport. The base is home to flight operations support divisions and several training schools, as well as the 1 Canadian Air Division and Canadian NORAD Region Headquarters. 17 Wing of the Canadian Forces is based at CFB Winnipeg; the Wing has three squadrons and six schools. It supports 113 units from Thunder Bay to the Saskatchewan/Alberta border, and from the 49th parallel north to the high Arctic. 17 Wing acts as a deployed operating base for CF-18 Hornet fighter\u2013bombers assigned to the Canadian NORAD Region.\nThe two 17 Wing squadrons based in the city are: the 402 (\"City of Winnipeg\" Squadron), which flies the Canadian-designed and produced de Havilland Canada CT-142 Dash 8 navigation trainer (a military variant of the Bombardier Dash 8 turboprop aircraft) in support of the 1 Canadian Forces Flight Training School's Air Combat Systems Officer and Airborne Electronic Sensor Operator training programs (which trains all Canadian Air Combat Systems Officers); and the 435 (\"Chinthe\" Transport and Rescue Squadron), which flies the Lockheed C-130 Hercules tanker/transport in airlift search and rescue roles, and is the only Air Force C-130 squadron equipped and trained to conduct air-to-air refuelling of fighter aircraft.\nCanadian Forces Base Shilo (CFB Shilo) is an Operations and Training base of the Canadian Forces east of Brandon. During the 1990s, Canadian Forces Base Shilo was designated as an Area Support Unit, acting as a local base of operations for Southwest Manitoba in times of military and civil emergency. CFB Shilo is the home of the 1st Regiment, Royal Canadian Horse Artillery, both battalions of the 1 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group, and the Royal Canadian Artillery. The Second Battalion of Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry (2 PPCLI), which was originally stationed in Winnipeg (first at Fort Osborne, then in Kapyong Barracks), has operated out of CFB Shilo since 2004. CFB Shilo hosts a training unit, 3rd Canadian Division Training Centre. It serves as a base for support units of 3rd Canadian Division, also including 3 CDSG Signals Squadron, Shared Services Unit (West), 11 CF Health Services Centre, 1 Dental Unit, 1 Military Police Regiment, and an Integrated Personnel Support Centre. The base houses 1,700 soldiers.\nGovernment and politics.\nAfter the control of Rupert's Land was passed from Britain to the Government of Canada in 1869, Manitoba attained full-fledged rights and responsibilities of self-government as the first Canadian province carved out of Rupert's Land. The Legislative Assembly of Manitoba was established on 14 July 1870. Political parties emerged between 1878 and 1883, establishing a two-party system led by the Liberals and the Conservatives. The United Farmers of Manitoba appeared in 1922, and later merged with the Liberals in 1932. Other parties, including the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF), appeared during the Great Depression; in the 1950s, Manitoban politics became a three-party system, and the Liberals gradually declined in power. The CCF became the New Democratic Party of Manitoba (NDP), which came to power in 1969. Since then, the Progressive Conservatives and the NDP have been the dominant parties.\nLike all Canadian provinces, Manitoba is governed by a unicameral legislative assembly. The executive branch is formed by the governing party; the party leader is the premier of Manitoba, the head of the executive branch. The head of state, King Charles\u00a0III, is represented by the lieutenant governor of Manitoba, who is appointed by the governor general of Canada on advice of the prime minister. The head of state serves a primarily ceremonial role, although the lieutenant governor is officially responsible for ensuring Manitoba has a duly constituted government.\nThe Legislative Assembly consists of the 57 Members elected to represent the people of Manitoba. The premier of Manitoba is Wab Kinew, who was elected in the 2023 provincial election. The province is represented in federal politics by 14 Members of Parliament and six Senators.\nManitoba's judiciary consists of the Court of Appeal, the Court of King's Bench, and the Provincial Court. The Provincial Court is primarily for criminal law; 95 per cent of criminal cases in Manitoba are heard here. The Court of King's Bench, the highest trial court in the province, is a superior court of general jurisdiction, including constitutional issues, civil matters, family law, and criminal matters. It has criminal jurisdiction over the most serious indictable offences, judicial review over provincial administrative agencies, and appellate jurisdiction in summary conviction cases heard in the Provincial Court. The Court of Appeal is a superior court of appellate jurisdiction and hears appeals from both the King's Bench and the Provincial Court. Its decisions can only be appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada.\nOfficial languages.\nBoth English and French are official languages of the legislature and courts of Manitoba, according to section 23 of the \"Manitoba Act, 1870\" (part of the Constitution of Canada). In April 1890, the Manitoba legislature attempted to abolish the official status of French and ceased to publish bilingual legislation. However, in 1985, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled in the Reference re Manitoba Language Rights that section 23 still applied, and that English-only legislation was invalid\u2014though it was temporarily upheld to allow time for translation.\nAlthough French is an official language for the purposes of the legislature, legislation, and the courts, the \"Manitoba Act\" does not require it to be an official language for the purpose of the executive branch (except when performing legislative or judicial functions). Hence, Manitoba's government is not completely bilingual. The Manitoba French Language Services Policy of 1999 is intended to provide a comparable level of provincial government services in both official languages. According to the 2006 Census, 82.8 percent of Manitoba's population spoke only English, 3.2 percent spoke only French, 15.1 percent spoke both, and 0.9 percent spoke neither.\nIn 2010, the provincial government of Manitoba passed the \"Aboriginal Languages Recognition Act\", which gives official recognition to seven indigenous languages: Cree, Dakota, Dene, Inuktitut, Michif, Ojibway and Oji-Cree.\nTransportation.\nManitoba has two Class\u00a0I railways: Canadian National Railway (CN) and Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR). Winnipeg is centrally located on the main lines of both carriers, and both maintain large inter-modal terminals in the city. Via Rail offers transcontinental and Northern Manitoba passenger service from Winnipeg's Union Station. Numerous small regional and short-line railways also run trains within Manitoba: the Hudson Bay Railway, the Southern Manitoba Railway, Burlington Northern Santa Fe Manitoba, Greater Winnipeg Water District Railway, and Central Manitoba Railway.\nWinnipeg James Armstrong Richardson International Airport, Manitoba's largest airport, is one of only a few 24-hour unrestricted airports in Canada and is part of the National Airports System. A new, larger terminal opened in October 2011. It is the seventh busiest airport in Canada by passenger traffic, serving 4,484,343 passengers in 2018, and the 11th busiest airport by aircraft movements. The airport handles approximately of cargo annually, making it the third largest cargo airport in the country. Winnipeg is a major sorting facility for both FedEx and Purolator, and receives daily trans-border service from UPS.\nThe Port of Churchill is the only Arctic deep-water port in Canada. It is nautically closer to ports in Northern Europe and Russia than any other port in Canada. It has four deep-sea berths for the loading and unloading of grain, general cargo and tanker vessels. The port is served by the Hudson Bay Railway. The port and railway came under complete community and Indigenous ownership in 2021, after AGT Food and Ingredients and Fairfax Financial transferred their shares in Arctic Gateway to OneNorth \u2013 a consortium of community and Indigenous partners which owned the other fifty percent of Arctic Gateway's shares.\nEducation.\nPublic schools follow a provincially mandated curriculum in either French or English. There are sixty-five funded independent schools in Manitoba, including three boarding schools. These schools must follow the Manitoban curriculum and meet other provincial requirements. There are forty-four non-funded independent schools, which are not required to meet those standards. Public schools in Manitoba fall under the regulation of one of thirty-seven school divisions within the provincial education system (except for the Manitoba Band Operated Schools, which are administered by the federal government). In 2021, the provincial government announced a plan to merge all English-language school divisions into 15 regional catchment areas, overseen by a provincial education authority.\nThere are five universities in Manitoba, regulated by the Ministry of Advanced Education and Literacy. Four of these universities are in Winnipeg: the University of Manitoba, the largest and most comprehensive; the University of Winnipeg, a liberal arts school primarily focused on undergrad studies downtown; Universit\u00e9 de Saint-Boniface, the province's only French-language university; and the Canadian Mennonite University, a religious-based institution. The Universit\u00e9 de Saint-Boniface, established in 1818 and now affiliated with the University of Manitoba, is the oldest university in Western Canada. Brandon University, formed in 1899 and in Brandon, is the province's only university not in Winnipeg.\nManitoba has fifty-four public library systems. Of these, Winnipeg Public Library has the largest collections, at 1.1 million items as of 2020.\nCulture.\nArts.\nThe Minister of Culture, Heritage, Tourism and Sport is responsible for promoting and, to some extent, financing Manitoban culture. Manitoba is the birthplace of the Red River Jig, a combination of Indigenous pow-wows and European reels popular among early settlers. Manitoba's traditional music has strong roots in M\u00e9tis and First Nations culture, in particular the old-time fiddling of the M\u00e9tis. Manitoba's cultural scene also incorporates classical European traditions. The Winnipeg-based Royal Winnipeg Ballet (RWB), is Canada's oldest ballet and North America's longest continuously operating ballet company; it was granted its royal title in 1953 under Queen Elizabeth II. The Winnipeg Symphony Orchestra (WSO) performs classical music and new compositions at the Centennial Concert Hall. Manitoba Opera, founded in 1969, also performs out of the Centennial Concert Hall.\nLe Cercle Moli\u00e8re (founded 1925) is the oldest French-language theatre in Canada, and Royal Manitoba Theatre Centre (founded 1958) is Canada's oldest English-language regional theatre. Manitoba Theatre for Young People was the first English-language theatre to win the Canadian Institute of the Arts for Young Audiences Award, and offers plays for children and teenagers as well as a theatre school. The Winnipeg Art Gallery (WAG), Manitoba's largest art gallery and the sixth largest in the country, hosts an art school for children; the WAG's permanent collection comprises over twenty thousand works, with a particular emphasis on Manitoban and Canadian art.\nThe 1960s pop group the Guess Who was formed in Manitoba. Guess Who guitarist Randy Bachman later created Bachman\u2013Turner Overdrive (BTO) with fellow Winnipeg-based musician Fred Turner. Fellow rocker Neil Young grew up in Manitoba, and later played in Buffalo Springfield and Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young. Folk rock band Crash Test Dummies formed in the late 1980s in Winnipeg and were the 1992 Juno Awards Group of the Year. \nSeveral prominent Canadian films were produced in Manitoba, such as \"The Stone Angel\", based on the Margaret Laurence book of the same title, \"The Saddest Music in the World\", \"Foodland\", \"For Angela\", and \"My Winnipeg\". Major films shot in Manitoba include \"The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford\" and \"Capote\", both of which received Academy Award nominations. \"Falcon Beach\", an internationally broadcast television drama, was filmed at Winnipeg Beach, Manitoba.\nManitoba has a strong literary tradition. Bertram Brooker won the first-ever Governor General's Award for Fiction in 1936. Cartoonist Lynn Johnston, author of the comic strip \"For Better or For Worse\", was a finalist for a 1994 Pulitzer Prize and inducted into the Canadian Cartoonist Hall of Fame. Margaret Laurence's \"The Stone Angel\" and \"A Jest of God\" were set in Manawaka, a fictional town representing Neepawa; the latter title won the Governor General's Award in 1966. Carol Shields won both the Governor General's Award and the Pulitzer Prize for \"The Stone Diaries\". Gabrielle Roy, a Franco-Manitoban writer, won the Governor General's Award three times. A quote from her writings is featured on the Canadian $20 bill. Joan Thomas was nominated for the Governor General's Award twice and won in 2019 for \"Five Wives\". The province has also been home to many of the key figures in Mennonite literature, including Governor General Award-winning Miriam Toews, Giller winner David Bergen, Armin Wiebe and many others. Sandra Birdsell, whose fiction focusses on her M\u00e9tis and Mennonite heritage, was thrice nominated for the Governor General's Literary Award for English Language Fiction, and also for the Scotiabank Giller Prize in 2001.\nFestivals.\nFestivals take place throughout the province, with the largest centred in Winnipeg. The Winnipeg Folk Festival has an annual attendance of over 70,000. The Festival du Voyageur is an annual ten-day event held in Winnipeg's French Quarter, and is Western Canada's largest winter festival. It celebrates Canada's fur-trading past and French-Canadian heritage and culture. Folklorama, a multicultural festival run by the Folk Arts Council, receives around 400,000 pavilion visits each year, of which about thirty percent are from non-Winnipeg residents. The Winnipeg Fringe Theatre Festival is an annual alternative theatre festival, the second-largest festival of its kind in North America (after the Edmonton International Fringe Festival).\nMuseums.\nManitoban museums document different aspects of the province's heritage. The Manitoba Museum is the largest museum in Manitoba and focuses on Manitoban history from prehistory to the 1920s. The full-size replica of the Nonsuch is the museum's showcase piece. The Manitoba Children's Museum at The Forks presents exhibits for children. There are two museums dedicated to the native flora and fauna of Manitoba: the Living Prairie Museum, a tall grass prairie preserve featuring 160 species of grasses and wildflowers, and FortWhyte Alive, a park encompassing prairie, lake, forest and wetland habitats, home to a large herd of bison. The Canadian Fossil Discovery Centre houses the largest collection of marine reptile fossils in Canada. Other museums feature the history of aviation, marine transport, and railways in the area. The Canadian Museum for Human Rights is the first Canadian national museum outside of the National Capital Region.\nMedia.\nWinnipeg has two daily newspapers: the \"Winnipeg Free Press\", a broadsheet with the highest circulation numbers in Manitoba, as well as the \"Winnipeg Sun\", a smaller tabloid-style paper. There are several ethnic weekly newspapers, including the weekly French-language \"La Libert\u00e9\", and regional and national magazines based in the city. Brandon had two newspapers: the daily \"Brandon Sun\" and the weekly \"Wheat City Journal\", but in 2019 the journal shut down operations, leaving the city with one remaining paper. Many small towns have local newspapers.\nThere are five English-language television stations and one French-language station based in Winnipeg. The Global Television Network (owned by Canwest) is headquartered in the city. Winnipeg is home to twenty-one AM and FM radio stations, two of which are French-language stations. Brandon's five local radio stations are provided by Astral Media and Westman Communications Group. In addition to the Brandon and Winnipeg stations, radio service is provided in rural areas and smaller towns by Golden West Broadcasting, Corus Entertainment, and local broadcasters. CBC Radio broadcasts local and national programming throughout the province. Native Communications is devoted to indigenous programming and broadcasts to many of the isolated native communities as well as to larger cities.\nSports.\nManitoba has five professional sports teams: the Winnipeg Sea Bears (Canadian Elite Basketball League) the Winnipeg Blue Bombers (Canadian Football League), the Winnipeg Jets (National Hockey League) and Manitoba Moose (American Hockey League), and the Winnipeg Goldeyes (American Association). The province was previously home to another team called the Winnipeg Jets, which played in the World Hockey Association and National Hockey League from 1972 until 1996, when financial troubles prompted a sale and move of the team to Arizona, where they became the Phoenix Coyotes. A second incarnation of the Winnipeg Jets returned after True North Sports &amp; Entertainment bought the Atlanta Thrashers and moved the team to Winnipeg in time for the 2011 hockey season. Manitoba has one major junior-level ice hockey team, the Western Hockey League's Brandon Wheat Kings, and one junior football team, the Winnipeg Rifles of the Canadian Junior Football League. It is also home to the Manitoba Fearless of the Western Women's Canadian Football League. The Manitoba Herd, meanwhile, compete in the National Ringette League.\nThe province is represented in university athletics by the university of Manitoba Bisons, the university of Winnipeg Wesmen, and the Brandon University Bobcats. All three teams compete in the Canada West Universities Athletic Association, a regional division of U Sports.\nCurling is an important winter sport in the province with Manitoba producing the second most men's national champions after Alberta, while additionally in the top 3 women's national champions, as well as multiple world champions in the sport. The province also hosts the world's largest curling tournament in the MCA Bonspiel.\nAlthough not as prominent as ice hockey and curling, long track speed skating also features as a notable and top winter sport in Manitoba. The province has produced some of the world's best female speed skaters including Susan Auch and the country's top Olympic medal earners Cindy Klassen and Clara Hughes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18927", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18927", "title": "Metaphysics/Introduction", "text": ""}
{"id": "18929", "revid": "11639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18929", "title": "Mount Logan", "text": "Highest mountain in Canada\nMount Logan ( ) is the highest mountain in Canada and the second-highest peak in North America after Denali (McKinley). The mountain was named after Sir William Edmond Logan, a Canadian geologist and founder of the Geological Survey of Canada (GSC). Mount Logan is located within Kluane National Park and Reserve in southwestern Yukon, less than north of the Yukon\u2013Alaska border. Mount Logan is the source of the Hubbard and Logan glaciers. Although many shield volcanoes are much larger in size and mass, Mount Logan is believed to have the largest base circumference of any non-volcanic mountain on Earth, including a massif with eleven peaks over . Mount Logan is the 6th most topographically prominent peak on Earth.\nDue to active tectonic uplifting, Mount Logan is still rising in height (approximately per year). Before 1992, the exact elevation of Mount Logan was unknown and measurements ranged from . In May 1992, a GSC expedition climbed Mount Logan and fixed the current height of using GPS.\nTemperatures are extremely low on and near Mount Logan. On the plateau, air temperature hovers around in the winter and reaches near freezing in summer with the median temperature for the year around . Minimal snow melt leads to a significant ice cap, almost thick in certain spots.\nPeaks of the massif.\nThe Mount Logan massif is considered to contain all the surrounding peaks with less than of prominence, as listed below:\nDiscovery and naming.\nMount Logan is not readily visible from the surrounding lowlands or the coast, due to its position in the heart of the Saint Elias Mountains, although it can be seen from out to sea. Pictures taken across Yakutat Bay to the south southeast suggest it is visible from near Yakutat. Its first reported sighting was in 1890 by American geologist Israel C. Russell, during an expedition to nearby Mount Saint Elias, from the crest of the Pinnacle Pass Hills (). Russel wrote: \"The clouds parting toward the northeast revealed several giant peaks not before seen... One stranger, rising in three white domes far above the clouds, was especially magnificent\". Russell gave the mountain its present name.\nIn 1894, Mount Logan's elevation was determined to be about , making it the highest known peak in North America at the time. In 1898, Denali was determined to be higher.\nAscent attempts.\nFirst ascent.\nIn 1922, a geologist approached the Alpine Club of Canada with the suggestion that the club send a team to the mountain to reach the summit for the first time. An international team of Canadian, British and American climbers was assembled the following year, initially planning an attempt in 1924 but forced by funding and preparation delays to postpone the trip until 1925. The international team of climbers began their journey in early May, crossing the mainland from the Pacific coast by train. They then walked the remaining to within of the Logan Glacier where they established base camp. In the early evening of June 23, 1925, Albert H. MacCarthy (leader), H.F. Lambart, Allen Carp\u00e9, Norman H. Read, W.W. Foster, and Andy Taylor stood on top of the summit for the first time. It had taken them 65 days to approach the mountain from the nearest town (McCarthy across the border in Alaska), reach the summit, and return, with all climbers intact, although some of them suffered severe frostbite.\nClimbing rules.\nIn January 2020, due to the cost of search and rescue operations in recent years, Parks Canada announced new rules for climbing Mount Logan:\nThere had been eight rescue missions in the previous seven years in Kluane National Park. Each mission typically cost between $60,000 to $100,000 CAD which is paid for by Canadian taxpayers. A Parks Canada spokesperson said the new rules are to help reduce the financial burden to taxpayers.\nProposed renaming.\nFollowing the death of Pierre Trudeau, former Prime Minister of Canada, in 2000, then Prime Minister Jean Chr\u00e9tien, a close friend of Trudeau, proposed renaming the mountain Mount Trudeau.\nHowever opposition from Yukoners, mountaineers, geologists, Trudeau's political critics, and many other Canadians forced the plan to be dropped. A mountain in the Premier Range of British Columbia was named Mount Pierre Elliott Trudeau instead.\nIn popular culture.\n\"X-Men\" writer Chris Claremont was inspired by Mount Logan for the adopted name of the superhero Wolverine; Claremont said in an interview that \"the idea was the tallest mountain being the name of the shortest character\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18930", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18930", "title": "Subject (philosophy)", "text": ""}
{"id": "18931", "revid": "4701696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18931", "title": "Metaphysical objectivism", "text": ""}
{"id": "18932", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18932", "title": "Media bias", "text": "Bias within the mass media\nMedia bias occurs when journalists and news producers show bias in how they report and cover news. The term \"media bias\" implies a pervasive or widespread bias contravening of the standards of journalism, rather than the perspective of an individual journalist or article. The direction and degree of media bias in various countries is widely disputed.\nPractical limitations to media neutrality include the inability of journalists to report all available stories and facts, and the requirement that selected facts be linked into a coherent narrative. Government influence, including overt and covert censorship, biases the media in some countries, for example China, North Korea, Syria and Myanmar. Politics and media bias may interact with each other; the media has the ability to influence politicians, and politicians may have the power to influence the media. This can change the distribution of power in society. Market forces may also cause bias. Examples include bias introduced by the ownership of media, including a concentration of media ownership, the subjective selection of staff, or the perceived preferences of an intended audience.\nAssessing possible bias is one aspect of media literacy, which is studied at schools of journalism, university departments (including media studies, cultural studies, and peace studies). Other focuses beyond political bias include international differences in reporting, as well as bias in reporting of particular issues such as economic class or environmental interests. Academic findings around bias can also differ significantly from public discourse and understanding of the term.\nTypes.\nIn the 2017 Oxford Handbook of Political Communication, S. Robert Lichter described how in academic circles, media bias is more of a hypothesis to explain various patterns in news coverage than any fully-elaborated theory, and that a variety of potentially overlapping types of bias have been proposed that remain widely debated.\nVarious proposed hypotheses of media bias have included:\nAn ongoing and unpublished research project named \"The Media Bias Taxonomy\" is attempting to assess the various definitions and meanings of media bias. While still ongoing, it attempts to summarize the domain as the distinct subcategories linguistic bias (encompassing linguistic intergroup bias, framing bias, epistemological bias, bias by semantic properties, and connotation bias), text-level context bias (featuring statement bias, phrasing bias, and spin bias), reporting-level context bias (highlighting selection bias, coverage bias, and proximity bias), cognitive biases (such as selective exposure and partisan bias), and related concepts like framing effects, hate speech, sentiment analysis, and group biases (encompassing gender bias, racial bias, and religion bias). The authors emphasize the complex nature of detecting and mitigating bias across different media content and contexts.\nHistory.\nJohn Milton's 1644 pamphlet \"Areopagitica, a Speech for the Liberty of Unlicensed Printing\" was one of the first publications advocating freedom of the press.\nIn the 19th century, journalists began to recognize the concept of unbiased reporting as an integral part of journalistic ethics. This coincided with the rise of journalism as a powerful social force. Even today, the most conscientiously objective journalists cannot avoid accusations of bias.\nLike newspapers, the broadcast media (radio and television) have been used as a mechanism for propaganda from their earliest days, a tendency made more pronounced by the initial ownership of broadcast spectrum by national governments. Although a process of media deregulation has placed the majority of the western broadcast media in private hands, there still exists a strong government presence, or even monopoly, in the broadcast media of many countries across the globe. At the same time, the concentration of media ownership in private hands, and frequently amongst a comparatively small number of individuals, has also led to accusations of media bias.\nThere are many examples of accusations of bias being used as a political tool, sometimes resulting in government censorship.\nNot all accusations of bias are political. Science writer Martin Gardner has accused the entertainment media of anti-science bias. He claimed that television programs such as \"The X-Files\" promote superstition. In contrast, the Competitive Enterprise Institute, which is funded by businesses, accuses the media of being biased in favor of science and against business interests, and of credulously reporting science that shows that greenhouse gasses cause global warming.\nStructural (non-ideological) biases.\nWhile most accusations of bias tend to revolve around ideological disagreements, other forms of bias are cast as structural in nature. There is little agreement on how they operate or originate but some involve economics, government policies, norms, and the individual creating the news. Some examples, according to Cline (2009) include commercial bias, temporal bias, visual bias, bad news bias, narrative bias, status quo bias, fairness bias, expediency bias, class bias and glory bias (or the tendency to glorify the reporter).\nThere is also a growing economics literature on mass media bias, both on the theoretical and the empirical side. On the theoretical side the focus is on understanding to what extent the political positioning of mass media outlets is mainly driven by demand or supply factors. This literature was surveyed by Andrea Prat of Columbia University and David Stromberg of Stockholm University in 2013.\nSupply-driven bias.\nWhen an organization prefers consumers to take particular actions, this would be supply-driven bias.\nImplications of supply-driven bias:\nAn example of supply-driven bias is Zinman and Zitzewitz's study of snowfall reporting. Ski attractions tend to be biased in snowfall reporting, reporting higher snowfall than official forecasts.\nDavid Baron suggests a game-theoretic model of mass media behaviour in which, given that the pool of journalists systematically leans towards the left or the right, mass media outlets maximise their profits by providing content that is biased in the same direction as their employees.\nHerman and Chomsky (1988) cite supply-driven bias including around the use of official sources, funding from advertising, efforts to discredit independent media (\"flak\"), and \"anti-communist\" ideology, resulting in news in favor of U.S. corporate interests.\nDemand-driven bias.\nDemand from media consumer for a particular type of bias is known as demand-driven bias. Consumers tend to favor a biased media based on their preferences, an example of confirmation bias.\nThere are three major factors that make this choice for consumers:\nDemand-side incentives are often not related to distortion. Competition can still affect the welfare and treatment of consumers, but it is not very effective in changing bias compared to the supply side.\nIn demand-driven bias, preferences and attitudes of readers can be monitored on social media, and mass media write news that caters to readers based on them. Mass media skew news driven by viewership and profits, leading to the media bias. And readers are also easily attracted to lurid news, although they may be biased and not true enough.\nDong, Ren, and Nickerson investigated Chinese stock-related news and weibos in 20132014 from Sina Weibo and Sina Finance (4.27 million pieces of news and 43.17 million weibos) and found that news that aligns with Weibo users' beliefs are more likely to attract readers. Also, the information in biased reports also influences the decision-making of the readers.\nIn Raymond and Taylor's test of weather forecast bias, they investigated weather reports of the New York Times during the games of the baseball team the Giants from 1890 to 1899. Their findings suggest that the New York Times produce biased weather forecast results depending on the region in which the Giants play. When they played at home in Manhattan, reports of sunny days predicting increased. From this study, Raymond and Taylor found that bias pattern in New York Times weather forecasts was consistent with demand-driven bias.\nSendhil Mullainathan and Andrei Shleifer of Harvard University constructed a behavioural model in 2005, which is built around the assumption that readers and viewers hold beliefs that they would like to see confirmed by news providers, which they argue the market then provides.\nDemand-driven models evaluate to what extent media bias stems from companies providing consumers what they want. Stromberg posits that because wealthier viewers result in more advertising revenue, the media as a result ends up targeted to whiter and more conservative consumers while wealthier urban markets may be more liberal and produce an opposite effect in newspapers in particular.\nSocial media.\nPerceptions of media bias may also be related to the rise of social media. The rise of social media has undermined the economic model of traditional media. The number of people who rely upon social media has increased and the number who rely on print news has decreased.\nStudies of social media and disinformation suggest that the political economy of social media platforms has led to a commodification of information on social media. Messages are prioritized and rewarded based on their virality and shareability rather than their truth, promoting radical, shocking click-bait content. \nSocial media influences people in part because of psychological tendencies to accept incoming information, to take feelings as evidence of truth, and to not check assertions against facts and memories.\nMedia bias in social media is also reflected in hostile media effect. Social media has a place in disseminating news in modern society, where viewers are exposed to other people's comments while reading news articles. In their 2020 study, Gearhart and her team showed that viewers' perceptions of bias increased and perceptions of credibility decreased after seeing comments with which they held different opinions.\nWithin the United States, Pew Research Center reported that 64% of Americans believed that social media had a toxic effect on U.S. society and culture in July 2020. Only 10% of Americans believed that it had a positive effect on society. Some of the main concerns with social media lie with the spread of deliberately false information and the spread of hate and extremism. Social scientist experts explain the growth of misinformation and hate as a result of the increase in echo chambers.\nFueled by confirmation bias, online echo chambers allow users to be steeped within their own ideology. Because social media is tailored to your interests and your selected friends, it is an easy outlet for political echo chambers. Another Pew Research poll in 2019 showed that 28% of US adults \"often\" find their news through social media, and 55% of US adults get their news from social media either \"often\" or \"sometimes\". Additionally, more people are reported as going to social media for their news as the COVID-19 pandemic has restricted politicians to online campaigns and social media live streams. GCF Global encourages online users to avoid echo chambers by interacting with different people and perspectives along with avoiding the temptation of confirmation bias.\nYu-Ru and Wen-Ting's research looks into how liberals and conservatives conduct themselves on Twitter after three mass shooting events. Although they would both show negative emotions towards the incidents they differed in the narratives they were pushing. Both sides would often contrast in what the root cause was along with who is deemed the victims, heroes, and villain/s. There was also a decrease in any conversation that was considered proactive.\nMedia scholar Siva Vaidhyanathan, in his book \"Anti-Social Media: How Facebook Disconnects Us and Undermines Democracy\" (2018), argues that on social media networks, the most emotionally charged and polarizing topics usually predominate, and that \"If you wanted to build a machine that would distribute propaganda to millions of people, distract them from important issues, energize hatred and bigotry, erode social trust, undermine journalism, foster doubts about science, and engage in massive surveillance all at once, you would make something a lot like Facebook.\"\nIn a 2021 report, researchers at the New York University's Stern Center for Business and Human Rights found that Republicans' frequent argument that social media companies like Facebook and Twitter have an \"anti-conservative\" bias is false and lacks any reliable evidence supporting it; the report found that right-wing voices are in fact dominant on social media and that the claim that these platforms have an anti-conservative lean \"is itself a form of disinformation.\"\nA 2021 study in \"Nature Communications\" examined political bias on social media by assessing the degree to which Twitter users were exposed to content on the left and right\u00a0\u2013 specifically, exposure on the home timeline (the \"news feed\"). The study found that conservative Twitter accounts are exposed to content on the right, whereas liberal accounts are exposed to moderate content, shifting those users' experiences toward the political center. The study determined: \"Both in terms of information to which they are exposed and content they produce, drifters initialized with Right-leaning sources stay on the conservative side of the political spectrum. Those initialized with Left-leaning sources, on the other hand, tend to drift toward the political center: they are exposed to more conservative content and even start spreading it.\" These findings held true for both hashtags and links. The study also found that conservative accounts are exposed to substantially more low-credibility content than other accounts.\nA 2022 study in \"PNAS,\" using a long-running massive-scale randomized experiment, found that the political right enjoys higher algorithmic amplification than the political left in six out of seven countries studied. In the US, algorithmic amplification favored right-leaning news sources.\nMedia bias is also reflected in search systems in social media. Kulshrestha and her team found through research in 2018 that the top-ranked results returned by these search engines can influence users' perceptions when they conduct searches for events or people, which is particularly reflected in political bias and polarizing topics.\nLanguage.\nTanya Pamplone warns that since much of international journalism takes place in English, there can be instances where stories and journalists from countries where English is not taught have difficulty entering the global conversation.\nLanguage may also introduce a more subtle form of bias. The selection of metaphors and analogies, or the inclusion of personal information in one situation but not another can introduce bias, such as a gender bias.\nReligion.\nThe Satanic panic, a moral panic and episode of national hysteria that emerged in the U.S. in the 1980s (and thereafter to Canada, Britain, and Australia), was reinforced by tabloid media and infotainment. Scholar Sarah Hughes, in a study published in 2016, argued that the panic \"both reflected and shaped a cultural climate dominated by the overlapping worldviews of politically active conservatives\" whose ideology \"was incorporated into the panic and reinforced through\" tabloid media, sensationalist television and magazine reporting, and local news. Although the panic dissipated in the 1990s after it was discredited by journalists and the courts, Hughes argues that the panic has had an enduring influence in American culture and politics even decades later.\nIn 2012, \"Huffington Post\", columnist Jacques Berlinerblau argued that secularism has often been misinterpreted in the media as another word for atheism.\nAccording to Stuart A. Wright in 1997, there are six factors that contribute to media bias against minority religions: first, the knowledge and familiarity of journalists with the subject matter; second, the degree of cultural accommodation of the targeted religious group; third, limited economic resources available to journalists; fourth, time constraints; fifth, sources of information used by journalists; and finally, the front-end/back-end disproportionality of reporting. According to Yale Law professor Stephen Carter, \"it has long been the American habit to be more suspicious of\u00a0\u2013 and more repressive toward\u00a0\u2013 religions that stand outside the mainline Protestant-Roman Catholic-Jewish troika that dominates America's spiritual life.\" As for front-end/back-end disproportionality, Wright says: \"news stories on unpopular or marginal religions frequently are predicated on unsubstantiated allegations or government actions based on faulty or weak evidence occurring at the front-end of an event. As the charges weighed in against material evidence, these cases often disintegrate. Yet rarely is there equal space and attention in the mass media given to the resolution or outcome of the incident. If the accused are innocent, often the public is not made aware.\"\nPolitics.\nAcademic studies tend not to confirm a popular media narrative of liberal journalists producing a left-leaning media bias in the U.S., though some studies suggest economic incentives may have that effect. Instead, the studies reviewed by S. Robert Lichter generally found the media to be a conservative force in politics. Political bias in media can be evaluated relative to the median voter and can vary by topic. \nImpacts of bias.\nCritics of media bias tend to point out how a particular bias benefits existing power structures, undermines democratic outcomes and fails to inform people with the information they need to make decisions around public policy.\nExperiments have shown that media bias affects behavior and more specifically influences the readership's political ideology. A study found higher politicization rates with increased exposure to the Fox News channel, while a 2009 study found a weakly-linked decrease in support for the Bush administration when given a free subscription to the right-leaning \"The Washington Times\" or left-leaning \"The Washington Post\".\nTrust in media.\nPerceptions of media bias and trust in the media have changed significantly from 1985-2011 in the US. Pew studies reported that the percentage of Americans who trusted that news media \"get their facts straight\" dropped from 55% in 1985, to 25% in 2011. Similarly, the percentage of Americans who trusted that news organizations would deal fairly with all sides when dealing with political and social issues dropped from 34% in 1985 to 16% in 2011. By 2011 almost two-thirds of respondents considered news organizations to be \"politically biased in their reporting\", up from 45% in 1985. Similar decreases in trust have been reported by Gallup, with In 2022, half of Americans responded that they believed that news organizations would deliberately attempt to mislead them.\nJonathan M. Ladd (2012), who has conducted intensive studies of media trust and media bias, concluded that the primary cause of belief in media bias is telling people that particular media are biased. People who are told that a medium is biased tend to believe that it is biased, and this belief is unrelated to whether that medium is actually biased or not. The only other factor with as strong an influence on belief that media is biased, he found, was extensive coverage of celebrities. A majority of people see such media as biased, while at the same time preferring media with extensive coverage of celebrities.\nEfforts to correct bias.\nNPR's ombudsman wrote a 2011 article about how to note the political leanings of think tanks or other groups that the average listener might not know much about before citing a study or statistic from an organization.\nAlgorithms.\nPolis (or Pol.is) is a social media website that allows people to share their opinions and ideas while elevating ideas that have more consensus. By September 2020, it had helped to form the core of dozens of pieces of legislation passed in Taiwan. Proponents had sought out a way to inform the government with the opinions of citizens between elections while also providing an online outlet for citizens that was less divisive and more informative than social media and other large websites.\nAttempts have also been made to utilize machine-learning to analyze the bias of text. For example, person-oriented framing analysis attempts to identify frames, i.e., \"perspectives\", in news coverage on a topic by determining how each person mentioned in the topic's coverage is portrayed.\nAnother approach, matrix-based news aggregation can help to reveal differences in media coverage between different countries, for example.\nGiving time to both sides.\nA technique used to avoid bias is the \"point/counterpoint\" or \"round table\", an adversarial format in which representatives of opposing views comment on an issue. This approach theoretically allows diverse views to appear in the media. However, the person organizing the report still has the responsibility to choose reporters or journalists that represent a diverse or balanced set of opinions, to ask them non-prejudicial questions, and to edit or arbitrate their comments fairly. When done carelessly, a point/counterpoint can be as unfair as a simple biased report, by suggesting that the \"losing\" side lost on its merits. Besides these challenges, exposing news consumers to differing viewpoints seems to be beneficial for a balanced understanding and more critical assessment of current events and latent topics. Using this format can also lead to accusations that the reporter has created a misleading appearance that viewpoints have equal validity (sometimes called \"false balance\"). This may happen when a taboo exists around one of the viewpoints, or when one of the representatives habitually makes claims that are easily shown to be inaccurate.\nThe CBC and Radio Canada, its French language counterpart, are governed by the 1991 Broadcasting Act, which states programming should be \"varied and comprehensive, providing balance of information...provide a reasonable opportunity for the public to be exposed to the expression of differing views on matters of public concern.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18934", "revid": "12797494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18934", "title": "Muhammad", "text": "Founder of Islam (c. 570\u2013632)\nMuhammad (c.\u2009570\u00a0\u2013 8 June 632\u00a0CE) was an Arab religious, military and political leader and the founder of Islam. According to Islam, he was a prophet who was divinely inspired to preach and confirm the monotheistic teachings of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and other prophets. He is believed by Muslims to be the Seal of the Prophets, and along with the Quran, his teachings and normative examples form the basis for Islamic religious belief.\nAccording to the traditional account, Muhammad was born in Mecca to the aristocratic Banu Hashim clan of the Quraysh. He was the son of Abdullah ibn Abd al-Muttalib and Amina bint Wahb. His father, Abdullah, the son of tribal leader Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hashim, died around the time Muhammad was born. His mother Amina died when he was six, leaving Muhammad an orphan. He was raised under the care of his grandfather, Abd al-Muttalib, and paternal uncle, Abu Talib. In later years, he would periodically seclude himself in a mountain cave named Hira for several nights of prayer. When he was 40, in c.\u2009610, Muhammad reported being visited by Gabriel in the cave and receiving his first revelation from God. In 613, Muhammad started preaching these revelations publicly, proclaiming that \"God is One\", that complete \"submission\" () to God () is the right way of life (), and that he was a prophet and messenger of God, similar to other prophets in Islam.\nMuhammad's followers were initially few in number, and experienced persecution by Meccan polytheists for 13 years. To escape ongoing persecution, he sent some of his followers to Abyssinia in 615, before he and his followers migrated from Mecca to Medina (then known as Yathrib) later in 622. This event, the , marks the beginning of the Islamic calendar, also known as the Hijri calendar. In Medina, Muhammad united the tribes under the Constitution of Medina. In December 629, after eight years of intermittent fighting with Meccan tribes, Muhammad gathered an army of 10,000 Muslim converts and marched on the city of Mecca. The conquest went largely uncontested, and Muhammad seized the city with minimal casualties. In 632, a few months after returning from the Farewell Pilgrimage, he fell ill and died. By the time of his death, most of the Arabian Peninsula had converted to Islam.\nThe revelations () that Muhammad reported receiving until his death form the verses () of the Quran, upon which Islam is based, and are regarded by Muslims as the verbatim word of God and his final revelation. Besides the Quran, Muhammad's teachings and practices, found in transmitted reports, known as hadith, and in his biography (), are also upheld and used as sources of Islamic law. Apart from Islam, Muhammad has received praise in Sikhism as an inspirational figure, in the Druze faith as one of the seven main prophets, and in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith as a Manifestation of God.\nBiographical sources.\nCritical evaluation of sources is of particular importance in uncovering Muhammad's historical existence beyond the myths. Early sources for the life of Muhammad are authors from the 2nd and 3rd centuries AH (8th and 9th centuries\u00a0CE), whose works constructed main biographical information to the Muslim traditions regarding his life, but the reliability of this information is very much debated in academic circles due to the oral gap between the recorded dates of Muhammad's life and the dates when these writings begin to appear in sources. John Burton summarizes the information provided by the multitude of available sources, from a historian's perspective: states In judging the content, the only resort of the scholar is to the yardstick of probability, and on this basis, it must be repeated, virtually nothing of use to the historian emerges from the sparse record of the early life of the founder of the latest of the great world religions ... so, however far back in the Muslim tradition one now attempts to reach, one simply cannot recover a scrap of information of real use in constructing the human history of Muhammad, beyond the bare fact that he once existed.\nOn the other hand, Karen Armstrong believes that \u2014thanks to these early biographical efforts\u2014 more is known about Muhammad than almost about the founders of all the other major religions.\nEarly biographies.\n Important early sources for the life of Muhammad are authors from the 2nd and 3rd centuries AH (overlapping with the 8th and 9th centuries\u00a0CE), whose works supplied additional biographical information to the Muslim traditions regarding his life. The information used in early Islamic historiography emerged as the sporadic products of storytellers (\"q\u0101\u1e63\u1e63\", pl. \"qu\u1e63\u1e63\u0101\u1e63\") -they were quite prestigious then- without details. At the same time the study of the earliest periods in Islamic history is made difficult by a lack of sources. While the narratives were initially in the form of a kind of heroic epics called mag\u0101z\u012b, details were added later, edited and transformed into sirah compilations. Western historians describe the purpose of these early biographies as largely to convey a message, rather than to strictly and accurately record history.\nThe earliest written (biographies of Muhammad and quotes attributed to him) is Ibn Ishaq's \"Life of God's Messenger\" written c.\u2009767 (150\u00a0AH). Although the original work was lost, this survives as extensive excerpts in works by Ibn Hisham and to a lesser extent by al-Tabari. However, Ibn Hisham wrote in the preface to his biography of Muhammad that he omitted matters from Ibn Ishaq's biography that \"would distress certain people\". Another early historical source is the history of Muhammad's campaigns by al-Waqidi (d.\u2009207\u00a0AH), and the work of Waqidi's secretary Ibn Sa'd al-Baghdadi (d.\u2009230\u00a0AH). \nHadith.\nOther important traditional sources include the hadith collections, accounts of verbal and physical teachings and approvals attributed to Muhammad. Hadiths were compiled several generations after his death by Muslims including Muhammad al-Bukhari, Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj, Muhammad ibn Isa at-Tirmidhi, Abd ar-Rahman al-Nasai, Abu Dawood, Ibn Majah, Malik ibn Anas, al-Daraqutni. The hadiths generally present an idealized view of Muhammad.\nMuslim scholars placed more trust in hadith than in biographical literature because hadiths were generally based on a chain of transmission (); the absence of such a chain in biographical literature made it, in their eyes, unverifiable. Hadiths were classified by Islamic scholars according to their reliability based on the chain of transmission; and different schools of thought relied on different collections. These sources, distrusted by Quranist scholars, are also viewed with suspicion by Western researchers. Western scholars widely believed that there was widespread fabrication of hadith during the early centuries of Islam to support certain theological and legal positions. In addition, the meaning of a hadith may have drifted from its original telling to when it was finally written down, even if the chain of transmission is authentic.\nAlthough the \"dominant paradigm\" of Western scholars is to find their reliability questionable, some have - with caution - regarded them as accurate historical sources. Scholars such as Wilferd Madelung, on the other hand, do not reject the hadiths compiled in later periods, but evaluate them in their historical context. In other words, according to him, they contained clues not from the life of Muhammad, but from the mentality of the period in which they were written.\nQuran.\nThe Quran is the central religious text of Islam. Muslims believe it represents the word of God revealed to Muhammad by the archangel Gabriel. The Quran is primarily addressed to a single \"Messenger of God,\" identified as Muhammad in a number of verses. In contrast to the hundreds of references to earlier prophets such as Moses and Jesus, it contains comparatively little direct information about Muhammad himself, or his companions. The text also briefly refers to episodes from Muhammad's career, such as the migration of his followers to Yathrib and the Battle of Badr.\nMeccan years.\nEarly life.\nMuhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hashim was born in Mecca c.\u2009570, and his birthday is believed to be in the month of Rabi' al-Awwal. He belonged to the Banu Hashim clan of the Quraysh tribe, which was a dominant force in western Arabia. While his clan was one of the more distinguished in the tribe, it seems to have experienced a lack of prosperity during his early years.\nAccording to Muslim tradition, Muhammad was a , someone who professed monotheism in pre-Islamic Arabia. He is also claimed to have been a descendant of Ishmael, son of Abraham.\nThe name Muhammad means \"praiseworthy\" in Arabic and it appears four times in the Quran. He was also known as \"al-Amin\" (lit.\u2009'faithful') when he was young; however, historians differ as to whether it was given by people as a reflection of his nature or was simply a given name from his parents, i.e., a masculine form of his mother's name \"Amina\". Muhammad acquired the of Abu al-Qasim later in his life after the birth of his son Qasim, who died two years afterwards.\nIslamic tradition states that Muhammad's birth year coincided with the Year of the Elephant, when Abraha, the Aksumite viceroy in the former Himyarite Kingdom, unsuccessfully attempted to conquer Mecca. Recent studies, however, challenge this notion, as other evidence suggests that the expedition, if it had occurred, would have transpired substantially before Muhammad's birth. Later Muslim scholars presumably linked Abraha's renowned name to the narrative of Muhammad's birth to elucidate the unclear passage about \"the men of elephants\" in Quran 105:1\u20135. \"The Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity\" deems the tale of Abraha's war elephant expedition as a myth.\nMuhammad's father, Abdullah, died almost six months before he was born. Muhammad then stayed with his foster mother, Halima bint Abi Dhu'ayb, and her husband until he was two years old. At the age of six, Muhammad lost his biological mother Amina to illness and became an orphan. For the next two years, until he was eight years old, Muhammad was under the guardianship of his paternal grandfather, Abd al-Muttalib, until the latter's death. He then came under the care of his uncle, Abu Talib, the new leader of the Banu Hashim. Abu Talib's brothers assisted with Muhammad's learning\u00a0\u2013 Hamza, the youngest, trained Muhammad in archery, swordsmanship, and martial arts. Another uncle, Abbas, provided Muhammad with a job leading caravans on the northern segment of the route to Syria.\nThe historical record of Mecca during Muhammad's early life is limited and fragmentary, making it difficult to distinguish between fact and legend. Several Islamic narratives relate that Muhammad, as a child, went on a trading trip to Syria with his uncle Abu Talib and met a monk named Bahira, who is said to have then foretold his prophethood. There are multiple versions of the story with details that contradict each other. All accounts of Bahira and his meeting with Muhammad have been considered fictitious by modern historians as well as by some medieval Muslim scholars such as al-Dhahabi.\nSometime later in his life, Muhammad proposed marriage to his cousin and first love, Fakhitah bint Abi Talib. But likely owing to his poverty, his proposal was rejected by her father, Abu Talib, who chose a more illustrious suitor. When Muhammad was 25, his fortunes turned around; his business reputation caught the attention of his 40-year-old distant relative Khadija, a wealthy businesswoman who had staked out a successful career as a merchant in the caravan trade industry. She asked him to take one of her caravans into Syria, after which she was so impressed by his competence in the expedition that she proposed marriage to him; Muhammad accepted her offer and remained monogamous with her until her death.\nIn 605, the Quraysh decided to roof the Kaaba, which had previously consisted only of walls. A complete rebuild was needed to accommodate the new weight. Amid concerns about upsetting the deities, a man stepped forth with a pickaxe and exclaimed, \"O goddess! Fear not! Our intentions are only for the best.\" With that, he began demolishing it. The anxious Meccans awaited divine retribution overnight, but his unharmed continuation the next day was seen as a sign of heavenly approval. According to a narrative collected by Ibn Ishaq, when it was time to reattach the Black Stone, a dispute arose over which clan should have the privilege. It was determined that the first person to step into the Kaaba's court would arbitrate. Muhammad took on this role, asking for a cloak. He placed the stone on it, guiding clan representatives to jointly elevate it to its position. He then personally secured it within the wall.\nBeginnings of the Quran.\nThe financial security Muhammad enjoyed from Khadija, his wealthy wife, gave him plenty of free time to spend in solitude in the cave of Hira. According to Islamic tradition, in 610, when he was 40 years old, the angel Gabriel appeared to him during his visit to the cave. The angel showed him a cloth with Quranic verses on it and instructed him to read. When Muhammad confessed his illiteracy, Gabriel choked him forcefully, nearly suffocating him, and repeated the command. As Muhammad reiterated his inability to read, Gabriel choked him again in a similar manner. This sequence took place once more before Gabriel finally recited the verses, allowing Muhammad to memorize them. These verses later constituted .\nWhen Muhammad came to his senses, he felt scared; he started to think that after all of this spiritual struggle, he had been visited by a jinn, which made him no longer want to live. In desperation, Muhammad fled from the cave and began climbing up towards the top of the mountain to jump to his death. But when he reached the summit, he experienced another vision, this time seeing a mighty being that engulfed the horizon and stared back at Muhammad even when he turned to face a different direction. This was the spirit of revelation (), which Muhammad later referred to as Gabriel; it was not a naturalistic angel, but rather a transcendent presence that resisted the ordinary limits of humanity and space.\nFrightened and unable to understand the experience, Muhammad hurriedly staggered down the mountain to his wife Khadija. By the time he got to her, he was already crawling on his hands and knees, shaking wildly and crying \"Cover me!\", as he thrust himself onto her lap. Khadija wrapped him in a cloak and tucked him in her arms until his fears dissipated. She had absolutely no doubts about his revelation; she insisted it was real and not a jinn. Muhammad was also reassured by Khadija's Christian cousin Waraqah ibn Nawfal, who jubilantly exclaimed \"Holy! Holy! If you have spoken the truth to me, O Khadijah, there has come to him the great divinity who came to Moses aforetime, and lo, he is the prophet of his people.\" Khadija instructed Muhammad to let her know if Gabriel returned. When he appeared during their private time, Khadija conducted tests by having Muhammad sit on her left thigh, right thigh, and lap, inquiring Muhammad if the being was still present each time. After Khadija removed her clothes with Muhammad on her lap, he reported that Gabriel left at that moment. Khadija thus told him to rejoice as she concluded it was not shayatin but an angel visiting him.\nMuhammad's demeanor during his moments of inspiration frequently led to allegations from his contemporaries that he was under the influence of a jinn, a soothsayer, or a magician, suggesting that his experiences during these events bore resemblance to those associated with such figures widely recognized in ancient Arabia. Nonetheless, these enigmatic seizure events might have served as persuasive evidence for his followers regarding the divine origin of his revelations. Some historians posit that the graphic descriptions of Muhammad's condition in these instances are likely genuine, as they are improbable to have been concocted by later Muslims.\nShortly after Waraqa's death, the revelations ceased for a period, causing Muhammad great distress and thoughts of suicide. On one occasion, he reportedly climbed a mountain intending to jump off. However, upon reaching the peak, Gabriel appeared to him, affirming his status as the true Messenger of God. This encounter soothed Muhammad, and he returned home. Later, when there was another long break between revelations, he repeated this action, but Gabriel intervened similarly, calming him and causing him to return home.\nMuhammad was confident that he could distinguish his own thoughts from these messages. The early Quranic revelations utilized approaches of cautioning non-believers with divine punishment, while promising rewards to believers. They conveyed potential consequences like famine and killing for those who rejected Muhammad's God and alluded to past and future calamities. The verses also stressed the imminent final judgment and the threat of hellfire for skeptics. Due to the complexity of the experience, Muhammad was initially very reluctant to tell others about his revelations; at first, he confided in only a few select family members and friends. According to Muslim tradition, Muhammad's wife Khadija was the first to believe he was a prophet. She was followed by Muhammad's ten-year-old cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib, close friend Abu Bakr, and adopted son Zayd. As word of Muhammad's revelations continued to spread throughout the rest of his family, they became increasingly divided on the matter, with the youth and women generally believing in him, while most of the men in the elder generations were staunchly opposed.\nOpposition in Mecca.\nAround 613, Muhammad began to preach to the public; many of his first followers were women, freedmen, servants, slaves, and other members of the lower social class. These converts keenly awaited each new revelation from Muhammad; when he recited it, they all would repeat after him and memorize it, and the literate ones recorded it in writing. Muhammad also introduced rituals to his group which included prayer () with physical postures that embodied complete surrender () to God, and almsgiving () as a requirement of the Muslim community (). By this point, Muhammad's religious movement was known as ('purification').\nInitially, he had no serious opposition from the inhabitants of Mecca, who were indifferent to his proselytizing activities, but when he started to attack their beliefs, tensions arose. The Quraysh challenged him to perform miracles, such as bringing forth springs of water, yet he declined, reasoning that the regularities of nature already served as sufficient proof of God's majesty. Some satirized his lack of success by wondering why God had not bestowed treasure upon him. Others called on him to visit Paradise and return with tangible parchment scrolls of the Quran. But Muhammad asserted that the Quran, in the form he conveyed it, was already an extraordinary proof.\nAccording to Amr ibn al-As, several of the Quraysh gathered at Hijr and discussed how they had never faced such serious problems as they were facing from Muhammad. They said that he had derided their culture, denigrated their ancestors, scorned their faith, shattered their community, and cursed their gods. Sometime later, Muhammad came, kissing the Black Stone and performing the ritual . As Muhammad passed by them, they reportedly said hurtful things to him. The same happened when he passed by them a second time. On his third pass, Muhammad stopped and said, \"Will you listen to me, O Quraysh? By Him (God), who holds my life in His hand, I bring you slaughter.\" They fell silent and told him to go home, saying that he was not a violent man. The next day, a number of Quraysh approached him, asking if he had said what they had heard from their companions. He answered yes, and one of them seized him by his cloak. Abu Bakr intervened, tearfully saying, \"Would you kill a man for saying God is my Lord?\" And they left him.\nThe Quraysh attempted to entice Muhammad to quit preaching by giving him admission to the merchants' inner circle as well as an advantageous marriage, but he refused both of the offers. A delegation of them then, led by the leader of the Makhzum clan, known by the Muslims as Abu Jahl, went to Muhammad's uncle Abu Talib, head of the Hashim clan and Muhammad's caretaker, giving him an ultimatum to disown Muhammad:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By God, we can no longer endure this vilification of our forefathers, this derision of our traditional values, this abuse of our gods. Either you stop Muhammad yourself, Abu Talib, or you must let us stop him. Since you yourself take the same position as we do, in opposition to what he's saying, we will rid you of him.\nAbu Talib politely dismissed them at first, thinking it was just a heated talk. But as Muhammad grew more vocal, Abu Talib requested Muhammad to not burden him beyond what he could bear, to which Muhammad wept and replied that he would not stop even if they put the sun in his right hand and the moon in his left. When he turned around, Abu Talib called him and said, \"Come back nephew, say what you please, for by God I will never give you up on any account.\"\nQuraysh delegation to Yathrib.\nThe leaders of the Quraysh sent Nadr ibn al-Harith and Uqba ibn Abi Mu'ayt to Yathrib to seek the opinions of the Jewish rabbis regarding Muhammad. The rabbis advised them to ask Muhammad three questions: recount the tale of young men who ventured forth in the first age; narrate the story of a traveler who reached both the eastern and western ends of the earth; and provide details about the spirit. If Muhammad answered correctly, they stated, he would be a Prophet; otherwise, he would be a liar. When they returned to Mecca and asked Muhammad the questions, he told them he would provide the answers the next day. However, 15 days passed without a response from his God, leading to gossip among the Meccans and causing Muhammad distress. At some point later, the angel Gabriel came to Muhammad and provided him with the answers.\nIn response to the first query, the Quran tells a story about a group of men sleeping in a cave (Quran 18:9\u201325), which scholars generally link to the legend of the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus. For the second query, the Quran speaks of Dhu al-Qarnayn, literally 'he of the two horns' (Quran 18:93\u201399), a tale that academics widely associate with the Alexander Romance. As for the third query, concerning the nature of the spirit, the Quranic revelation asserted that it was beyond human comprehension. Neither the Jews who devised the questions nor the Quraysh who posed them to Muhammad converted to Islam upon receiving the answers. Nadr and Uqba were later executed on Muhammad's orders after the Battle of Badr, while other captives were held for ransom. As Uqba pleaded, \"But who will take care of my children, Muhammad?\" Muhammad responded, \"Hell!\"\nMigration to Abyssinia.\nIn 615, Muhammad sent some of his followers to emigrate to the Abyssinian Kingdom of Aksum and found a small colony under the protection of the Christian Ethiopian emperor A\u1e63\u1e25ama ibn Abjar. Among those who departed were Umm Habiba, the daughter of one of the Quraysh chiefs, Abu Sufyan, and her husband. The Quraysh then sent two men to retrieve them. Because leatherwork at the time was highly prized in Abyssinia, they gathered a lot of skins and transported them there so they could distribute some to each of the kingdom's generals. But the king firmly rejected their request.\nWhile Tabari and Ibn Hisham mentioned only one migration to Abyssinia, there were two sets according to Ibn Sa'd. Of these two, the majority of the first group returned to Mecca before the event of , while the majority of the second group remained in Abyssinia at the time and went directly to Medina after the event of . These accounts agree that persecution played a major role in Muhammad sending them there. According to W. Montgomery Watt, the episodes were more complex than the traditional accounts suggest; he proposes that there were divisions within the embryonic Muslim community, and that they likely went there to trade in competition with the prominent merchant families of Mecca. In Urwa's letter preserved by Tabari, these emigrants returned after the conversion to Islam of a number of individuals in positions such as Hamza and Umar.\nThe Satanic Verses.\nAlong with many others, Tabari recorded that Muhammad was desperate, hoping for an accommodation with his tribe. So, while he was in the presence of a number of Quraysh, after delivering verses mentioning three of their favorite deities (Quran 53:19\u201320), Satan put upon his tongue two short verses: \"These are the high flying ones / whose intercession is to be hoped for.\" This led to a general reconciliation between Muhammad and the Meccans, and the Muslims in Abyssinia began to return home. However, the next day, Muhammad retracted these verses at the behest of Gabriel, claiming that they had been cast by Satan to his tongue and God had abrogated them. Instead, verses that revile those goddesses were then revealed. The returning Muslims thus had to make arrangements for clan protection before they could re-enter Mecca.\nAccording to the scholar Shahab Ahmed, the so-called Satanic Verses incident was reported en masse and documented by nearly all of the major biographers of Muhammad during Islam's first two centuries, which, according to these early sources, corresponds to Quran 22:52. Ahmed notes that with the rise of the hadith movement and systematic theology introducing new doctrines such as \u2014the belief in Muhammad\u2019s infallibility, which holds that he could not be deceived by Satan\u2014the early community\u2019s historical memory of the incident was reevaluated. By the 20th century, Muslim scholars unanimously rejected this incident. On the other hand, most European biographers of Muhammad have historically recognized the veracity of this incident of satanic verses on the basis of the criterion of embarrassment. Historian Alfred T. Welch proposes that the period of Muhammad's turning away from strict monotheism was likely far longer but was later encapsulated in a story that made it much shorter and implicated Satan as the culprit. However, recent Western secular scholarship has generally questioned the veracity of the Satanic Verses narrative.\nSocial exclusion of the Banu Hashim.\nIn 616, an agreement was established whereby all other Quraysh clans were to enforce a ban on the Banu Hashim, prohibiting trade and marriage with them. Nevertheless, Banu Hashim members could still move around Mecca freely. Despite facing increasing verbal abuse, Muhammad continued to navigate the streets and engage in public debates without being physically harmed. At a later point, a faction within Quraysh, sympathizing with Banu Hashim, initiated efforts to end the sanctions, resulting in a general consensus in 619 to lift the ban.\nAttempt to establish himself in Ta'if.\nIn 619, Muhammad faced a period of sorrow. His wife, Khadija, a crucial source of his financial and emotional support, died. In the same year, his uncle and guardian, Abu Talib, also died. Despite Muhammad's persuasions to Abu Talib to embrace Islam on his deathbed, he clung to his polytheistic beliefs until the end. Muhammad's other uncle, Abu Lahab, who succeeded the Banu Hashim clan leadership, was initially willing to provide Muhammad with protection. However, upon hearing from Muhammad that Abu Talib and Abd al-Muttalib were destined for hell due to not believing in Islam, he withdrew his support.\nMuhammad then went to Ta'if to try to establish himself in the city and gain aid and protection against the Meccans, but he was met with a response: \"If you are truly a prophet, what need do you have of our help? If God sent you as his messenger, why doesn't He protect you? And if Allah wished to send a prophet, couldn't He have found a better person than you, a weak and fatherless orphan?\" Realizing his efforts were in vain, Muhammad asked the people of Ta'if to keep the matter a secret, fearing that this would embolden the hostility of the Quraysh against him. However, instead of accepting his request, they pelted him with stones, injuring his limbs. He eventually evaded this chaos and persecution by escaping to the garden of Utbah ibn Rabi'ah, a Meccan chief with a summer residence in Ta'if. Muhammad felt despair due to the unexpected rejection and hostility he received in the city; at this point, he realized he had no security or protection except from God, so he began praying. Shortly thereafter, Utbah's Christian slave Addas stopped by and offered grapes, which Muhammad accepted. By the end of the encounter, Addas felt overwhelmed and kissed Muhammad's head, hands, and feet in recognition of his prophethood.\nOn Muhammad's return journey to Mecca, news of the events in Ta'if had reached the ears of Abu Jahl, and he said, \"They did not allow him to enter Ta'if, so let us deny him entry to Mecca as well.\" Knowing the gravity of the situation, Muhammad asked a passing horseman to deliver a message to Akhnas ibn Shariq, a member of his mother's clan, requesting his protection so that he could enter in safety. But Akhnas declined, saying that he was only a confederate of the house of Quraysh. Muhammad then sent a message to Suhayl ibn Amir, who similarly declined on the basis of tribal principle. Finally, Muhammad dispatched someone to ask Mut'im ibn 'Adiy, the chief of the Banu Nawfal. Mut'im agreed, and after equipping himself, he rode out in the morning with his sons and nephews to accompany Muhammad to the city. When Abu Jahl saw him, he asked if Mut'im was simply giving him protection or if he had already converted to his religion. Mut'im replied, \"Granting him protection, of course.\" Then Abu Jahl said, \"We will protect whomever you protect.\"\nIsra' and Mi'raj.\nThe writers of the place the famous Isra and Mi'raj at this low point in Muhammad's life, where Muslims today believe the Isra to be Muhammad's journey from Mecca to Jerusalem and the Mi'raj to be his journey from Jerusalem to heaven.There is no substantial basis for the Mi'raj in the Quran, as the Quran does not address it directly.\nThe 17th chapter of the Quran takes its name from a word used in the first verse; The name of the sura, -which was probably original one- \"Surat Ban\u012b Isr\u0101\u02be\u012bl\" (Surat Children of Israel), during the time of the Companions, gradually became the Surat Al-Isra, and simultaneously, narrations and explanations for Isra began to enter Islamic literature, which is presented as the first stage of the journey, expressed as Isra meaning to make someone walk. Verse 17:1 of the Quran recounts someone's (Abd-servant; according to the interpretation, this was Muhammad) night journey from a \"revered place of prayer\" to the \"most distant place of worship\".&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Glory be to the One Who took His servant by night from Masjid al-Haram to the Masjid al-Aqsa whose surroundings We have blessed, so that We may show him some of Our signs... \nThe Kaaba, holy enclosure in Mecca, is widely accepted as the starting point, but there is disagreement among Islamic traditions as to what constitutes \"the farthest place of worship\"; Some modern scholars maintain that the earliest tradition saw this faraway site as a celestial twin of the Kaaba, so that Muhammad's journey took him directly from Mecca through the heavens. A later tradition, however, refers to it as Bayt al-Maqdis, which is generally associated with Jerusalem. Over time, these different traditions merged to present the journey as one that began in Mecca, passed through Jerusalem, and then ascended to heaven. A different interpretation of the verse, the Al-aqsa used in the verse is not associated with Jerusalem, but with Al-Ji'rana, which is located near Mecca based on the hint that Masjid al-Haram is a night walk away from Masjid al-Aqsa.\nHans Wehr says that the 27th night of the month of Rajab chosen for the Miraj is not based on a report and is an arbitrary choice; Ibn Sa'd recorded that Muhammad's Mi'raj took place first, from near the Kaaba to the heavens, on the 27th of Ramadan, 18 months before the , while the Isra' from Mecca to took place on the 17th night of the Rabi' al-Awwal before the as two different, unconnected events. In Ibn Hisham's account, the Isra' came first and then the Mi'raj, and he put these stories before the deaths of Khadija and Abu Talib. In contrast, Al-Tabari placed this story at the beginning of Muhammad's public ministry, between his account of Khadija becoming \"the first to believe in the Messenger of God\" and his account of \"the first male to believe in the Messenger of God\".\nMigration to Medina.\nAs resistance to his proselytism in Mecca grew, Muhammad began to limit his efforts to non-Meccans who attended fairs or made pilgrimages. During this period, Muhammad had an encounter with six individuals from the Banu Khazraj. These men had a history of raiding Jews in their locality, who in turn would warn them that a prophet would be sent to punish them. On hearing Muhammad's religious message, they said to each other, \"This is the very prophet of whom the Jews warned us. Don't let them get to him before us!\" Upon embracing Islam, they returned to Medina and shared their encounter, hoping that by having their people\u2014the Khazraj and the Aws, who had been at odds for so long\u2014accept Islam and adopt Muhammad as their leader, unity could be achieved between them.\nThe next year, five of the earlier converts revisited Muhammad, bringing with them seven newcomers, three of whom were from the Banu Aws. At Aqaba, near Mecca, they pledged their loyalty to him. Muhammad then entrusted Mus'ab ibn Umayr to join them on their return to Medina to promote Islam. Come June 622, a significant clandestine meeting was convened, again at Aqaba. In this gathering, seventy-five individuals from Medina (then Yathrib) attended, including two women, representing all the converts of the oases. Muhammad asked them to protect him as they would protect their wives and children. They concurred and gave him their oath, commonly referred to as the second pledge at al-Aqabah or the pledge of war. Paradise was Muhammad's promise to them in exchange for their loyalty.\nSubsequently, Muhammad called upon the Meccan Muslims to relocate to Medina. This event is known as the , literally meaning 'severing of kinship ties'. The departures spanned approximately three months. To avoid arriving in Medina by himself with his followers remaining in Mecca, Muhammad chose not to go ahead and instead stayed back to watch over them and persuade those who were reluctant. Some were held back by their families from leaving, but in the end, there were no Muslims left in Mecca.\nIslamic tradition recounts that in light of the unfolding events, Abu Jahl proposed a joint assassination of Muhammad by representatives of each clan. Having been informed about this by the angel Gabriel, Muhammad asked his cousin Ali to lie in his bed covered with his green hadrami mantle, assuring that it would safeguard him. That night, the group of planned assassins approached Muhammad's home to carry out the attack but changed their minds upon hearing the voices of Sawdah and some of Muhammad's daughters, since it was considered shameful to kill a man in front of the women in his family. They instead chose to wait until Muhammad left the house the next morning; one of the men peeked into a window and saw what he believed to be Muhammad (but was actually Ali dressed in Muhammad's cloak), though unbeknownst to them, Muhammad had previously escaped from the back of the residence. When Ali went outside to go for a walk the following morning, the men realized they had been fooled, and the Quraysh consequently offered a 100-camel bounty for the return of Muhammad's body, dead or alive. After staying hidden for three days, Muhammad subsequently departed with Abu Bakr for Medina, which at the time was still named Yathrib; the two men arrived in Medina on 4 September 622. The Meccan Muslims who undertook the migration were then called the Muhajirun, while the Medinan Muslims were dubbed the Ansar.\nMedinan years.\nBuilding the religious community in Medina.\nA few days after settling in Medina, Muhammad negotiated for the purchase of a piece of land; upon this plot, the Muslims began constructing a building that would become Muhammad's residence as well as a community gathering place () for prayer (). Tree trunks were used as pillars to hold up the roof, and there was no fancy pulpit; instead, Muhammad stood on top of a small stool to speak to the congregation. The structure was completed after about seven months in April 623, becoming the first Muslim building and mosque; its northern wall had a stone marking the direction of prayer () which was Jerusalem at that time. Muhammad used the building to host public and political meetings, as well as a place for the poor to gather to receive alms, food, and care. Christians and Jews were also allowed to participate in community worship at the mosque. Initially, Muhammad's religion had no organized way to call the community to prayer in a coordinated manner. To resolve this, Muhammad had considered using a ram's horn () like the Jews or a wooden clapper like the Christians, but one of the Muslims in the community had a dream where a man in a green cloak told him that someone with a loud booming voice should announce the service by crying out \"allahu akbar\" ('God is greater') to remind Muslims of their top priority; when Muhammad heard about this dream, he agreed with the idea and selected Bilal, a former Abyssinian slave known for his loud voice.\nConstitution of Medina.\nThe text, referred to by contemporary popular Islamic writers as the Constitution of Medina, was a legal covenant or likely proclamation unilaterally written by Muhammad. Ibn Ishaq, following his narration of the , maintains that Muhammad penned the text and divulges its content without relying on the Islamic corroboration system. The appellation is generally deemed imprecise, as the text neither established a state nor enacted Quranic statutes, but rather addressed tribal matters. While scholars from both the West and the Muslim world agree on the text's authenticity, disagreements persist on whether it was a treaty or a unilateral proclamation by Muhammad, the number of documents it comprised, the primary parties, the specific timing of its creation (or that of its constituent parts), whether it was drafted before or after Muhammad's removal of the three leading Jewish tribes of Medina, and the proper approach to translating it.\nIn the text, Medina's Arab and Jewish tribes promised to live peacefully alongside the Muslims and to refrain from making a separate treaty with Mecca. It also guaranteed the Jews freedom of religion. In the agreement, everyone under its jurisdiction was required to defend and protect the oasis if attacked. Politically, the agreement helped Muhammad better understand which people were on his side.\nBeginning of armed conflict.\nFollowing the emigration, the people of Mecca seized property of Muslim emigrants to Medina. War would later break out between the people of Mecca and the Muslims. Muhammad delivered Quranic verses permitting Muslims to fight the Meccans. According to the traditional account, on 11 February 624, while praying in the Masjid al-Qiblatayn in Medina, Muhammad received revelations from God that he should be facing Mecca rather than Jerusalem during prayer. Muhammad adjusted to the new direction, and his companions praying with him followed his lead, beginning the tradition of facing Mecca during prayer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPermission has been given to those who are being fought, because they were wronged. And indeed, Allah is competent to give them victory. Those who have been evicted from their homes without right\u2014only because they say, \"Our Lord is Allah.\" And were it not that Allah checks the people, some by means of others, there would have been demolished monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques in which the name of Allah is much mentioned. And Allah will surely support those who support Him. Indeed, Allah is Powerful and Exalted in Might.\n\u2014\u2009Quran (22:39\u201340)\nMuhammad ordered a number of raids to capture Meccan caravans, but only the 8th of them, the Raid on Nakhla, resulted in actual fighting and capture of booty and prisoners. In March 624, Muhammad led some three hundred warriors in a raid on a Meccan merchant caravan. The Muslims set an ambush for the caravan at Badr. Aware of the plan, the Meccan caravan eluded the Muslims. A Meccan force was sent to protect the caravan and went on to confront the Muslims upon receiving word that the caravan was safe. Due to being outnumbered more than three to one, a spirit of fear ran throughout the Muslim camp; Muhammad tried to boost their morale by telling them he had a dream in which God promised to send 1,000 angels to fight with them. From a tactical standpoint, Muhammad placed troops in front of all of the wells so the Quraysh would have to fight for water, and positioned other troops in such a way that would require the Quraysh to fight uphill while also facing the sun. The Battle of Badr commenced, and the Muslims ultimately won, killing at least forty-five Meccans with fourteen Muslims dead. They also succeeded in killing many Meccan leaders, including Abu Jahl. Seventy prisoners had been acquired, many of whom were ransomed. Muhammad and his followers saw the victory as confirmation of their faith and Muhammad ascribed the victory to the assistance of an invisible host of angels. The Quranic verses of this period, unlike the Meccan verses, dealt with practical problems of government and issues like the distribution of spoils.\nThe victory strengthened Muhammad's position in Medina and dispelled earlier doubts among his followers. As a result, the opposition to him became less vocal. Pagans who had not yet converted were very bitter about the advance of Islam. Two pagans, Asma bint Marwan of the Aws Manat tribe and Abu 'Afak of the 'Amr b. 'Awf tribe, had composed verses taunting and insulting the Muslims. They were killed by people belonging to their own or related clans, and Muhammad did not disapprove of the killings. This report, however, is considered by some to be a fabrication. Most members of those tribes converted to Islam, and little pagan opposition remained.\nMuhammad expelled from Medina the Banu Qaynuqa, one of three main Jewish tribes, but some historians contend that the expulsion happened after Muhammad's death. According to al-Waqidi, after Abd Allah ibn Ubayy spoke for them, Muhammad refrained from executing them and commanded that they be exiled from Medina. Following the Battle of Badr, Muhammad also made mutual-aid alliances with a number of Bedouin tribes to protect his community from attacks from the northern part of Hejaz.\nConflicts with Jewish tribes.\nOnce the ransom arrangements for the Meccan captives were finalized, he initiated a siege on the Banu Qaynuqa, regarded as the weakest and wealthiest of Medina's three main Jewish tribes. Muslim sources provide different reasons for the siege, including an altercation involving Hamza and Ali in the Banu Qaynuqa market, and another version by Ibn Ishaq, which tells the story of a Muslim woman being pranked by a Qaynuqa goldsmith. Regardless of the cause, the Banu Qaynuqa sought refuge in their fort, where Muhammad blockaded them, cutting off their access to food supplies. The Banu Qaynuqa requested help from their Arab allies, but the Arabs refused since they were supporters of Muhammad. After roughly two weeks, the Banu Qaynuqa capitulated without engaging in combat.\nFollowing the surrender of the Qaynuqa, Muhammad was moving to execute the men of the tribe when Abdullah ibn Ubayy, a Muslim Khazraj chieftain who had been aided by the Qaynuqa in the past encouraged Muhammad to show leniency. In a narrated incident, Muhammad turned away from Ibn Ubayy, but undeterred, the chieftain grasped Muhammad's cloak, and refused to let go until Muhammad agreed to treat the tribe leniently. Despite being angered by the incident, Muhammad spared the Qaynuqa, stipulating that they must depart Medina within three days and relinquish their property to the Muslims, with a fifth () being retained by Muhammad.\nBack in Medina, Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf, a wealthy half-Jewish man from Banu Nadir and staunch critic of Muhammad, had just returned from Mecca after producing poetry that mourned the death of the Quraysh at Badr and aroused them to retaliate. When Muhammad learned of this incitement against the Muslims, he asked his followers, \"Who is ready to kill Ka'b, who has hurt God and His apostle?\" Ibn Maslamah offered his services, explaining that the task would require deception. Muhammad did not contest this. He then gathered accomplices, including Ka'b's foster brother, Abu Naila. They pretended to complain about their post-conversion hardships, persuading Ka'b to lend them food. On the night of their meeting with Ka'b, they murdered him when he was caught off-guard.\nMeccan retaliation.\nIn 625, the Quraysh, wearied by Muhammad's continuous attacks on their caravans, decided to take decisive action. Led by Abu Sufyan, they assembled an army to oppose Muhammad. Upon being alerted by his scout about the impending threat, Muhammad convened a war council. Initially, he considered defending from the city center, but later decided to meet the enemy in open battle at Mount Uhud, following the insistence of the younger faction of his followers. As they prepared to depart, the remaining Jewish allies of Abdullah ibn Ubayy offered their help, which Muhammad declined. Despite being outnumbered, the Muslims initially held their ground but lost advantage when some archers disobeyed orders. As rumors of Muhammad's death spread, the Muslims started to flee, but he had only been injured and managed to escape with a group of loyal adherents. Satisfied they had restored their honor, the Meccans returned to Mecca. Mass casualties suffered by the Muslims in the Battle of Uhud resulted in many wives and daughters being left without a male protector, so after the battle, Muhammad received revelation allowing Muslim men to have up to four wives each, marking the beginning of polygyny in Islam.\nSometime later, Muhammad found himself needing to pay blood money to Banu Amir. He sought monetary help from the Jewish tribe of Banu Nadir, and they agreed to his request. However, while waiting, he departed from his companions and disappeared. When they found him at his home, according to Ibn Ishaq, Muhammad disclosed that he had received a divine revelation of a planned assassination attempt on him by the Banu Nadir, which involved dropping a boulder from a rooftop. Muhammad then initiated a siege on the tribe; during this time he also commanded the felling and burning of their palm groves, which was an unambiguous symbol of declaring war in Arabia. After a fortnight or so, the Banu Nadir capitulated. They were directed to vacate their land and permitted to carry only one camel-load of goods for every three people. From the spoils, Muhammad claimed a fertile piece of land where barley sprouted amongst palm trees.\nRaid on the Banu Mustaliq.\nUpon receiving a report that the Banu Mustaliq were planning an attack on Medina, Muhammad's troops executed a surprise attack on them at their watering place, causing them to flee rapidly. In the confrontation, the Muslims lost one man, while the enemy suffered ten casualties. As part of their triumph, the Muslims seized 2,000 camels, 500 sheep and goats, and 200 women from the tribe. The Muslim soldiers desired the captive women, but they also sought ransom money. They asked Muhammad about using to prevent pregnancy, to which Muhammad replied, \"You are not under any obligation to forbear from that...\" Later, envoys arrived in Medina to negotiate the ransom for the women and children. Despite having the choice, all of them chose to return to their country instead of staying.\nBattle of the Trench.\nWith the help of the exiled Banu Nadir, the Quraysh military leader Abu Sufyan mustered a force of 10,000 men. Muhammad prepared a force of about 3,000 men and adopted a form of defense unknown in Arabia at that time; the Muslims dug a trench wherever Medina lay open to cavalry attack. The idea is credited to a Persian convert to Islam, Salman the Persian. The siege of Medina began on 31 March 627 and lasted two weeks. Abu Sufyan's troops were unprepared for the fortifications, and after an ineffectual siege, the coalition decided to return home. The Quran discusses this battle in sura Al-Ahzab, in verses 33:9\u201327.\nDuring the battle, the Jewish tribe of Banu Qurayza, located to the south of Medina, entered into negotiations with Meccan forces to revolt against Muhammad. Although the Meccan forces were swayed by suggestions that Muhammad was sure to be overwhelmed, they desired reassurance in case the confederacy was unable to destroy him. No agreement was reached after prolonged negotiations, partly due to sabotage attempts by Muhammad's scouts. After the coalition's retreat, the Muslims accused the Banu Qurayza of treachery and besieged them in their forts for 25 days. The Banu Qurayza eventually surrendered; according to Ibn Ishaq, all the men apart from a few converts to Islam were beheaded, while the women and children were enslaved. Walid N. Arafat and Barakat Ahmad have disputed the accuracy of Ibn Ishaq's narrative. Arafat believes that Ibn Ishaq's Jewish sources, speaking over 100 years after the event, conflated this account with memories of earlier massacres in Jewish history; he notes that Ibn Ishaq was considered an unreliable historian by his contemporary Malik ibn Anas, and a transmitter of \"odd tales\" by the later Ibn Hajar. Ahmad argues that only some of the tribe were killed, while some of the fighters were merely enslaved. Watt finds Arafat's arguments \"not entirely convincing\", while Meir J. Kister has refuted the arguments of Arafat and Ahmad.\nIn the siege of Medina, the Meccans exerted the available strength to destroy the Muslim community. The failure resulted in a significant loss of prestige; their trade with Syria vanished. Following the Battle of the Trench, Muhammad made two expeditions to the north, both ended without any fighting. While returning from one of these journeys (or some years earlier according to other early accounts), an accusation of adultery was made against Aisha, Muhammad's wife. Aisha was exonerated from accusations when Muhammad announced he had received a revelation confirming Aisha's innocence and directing that charges of adultery be supported by four eyewitnesses (sura 24, An-Nur).\nInvasion of the Banu Qurayza.\nOn the day the Quraysh forces and their allies withdrew, Muhammad, while bathing at his wife's abode, received a visit from the angel Gabriel, who instructed him to attack the Jewish tribe of Banu Qurayza. Islamic sources recount that during the preceding Meccan siege, the Quraysh leader Abu Sufyan incited the Qurayza to attack the Muslims from their compound, but the Qurayza demanded the Quraysh to provide 70 hostages from among themselves to ascertain their commitment to their plans, as proposed by Muhammad's secret agent Nuaym ibn Masud. Abu Sufyan refused their requirement. Nevertheless, later accounts claim that 11 Jewish individuals from the Qurayza were indeed agitated and acted against Muhammad, though the course of event may have been dramatized within the tradition.\nCiting the intrigue of the Qurayza, Muhammad besieged the tribe, though the tribe denied the charges. However, there are sources that say the Banu Qurayza broke the treaty with Muhammad and assisted the enemies of Muslims during the Battle of the Trench. As the situation turned against the Qurayza, the tribe proposed to leave their land with one loaded camel each, but Muhammad refused. They then offered to leave without taking anything, but this was rejected as well, with Muhammad insisting on their unconditional surrender. The Qurayza subsequently requested to confer with one of their Aws allies who had embraced Islam, leading to the arrival of Abu Lubaba. When asked about Muhammad's intentions, he gestured towards his throat, indicating an imminent massacre. He immediately regretted his indiscretion and tied himself to one of the Mosque pillars as a form of penance.\nAfter a 25-day siege, the Banu Qurayza surrendered. The Muslims of Banu Aws entreated Muhammad for leniency, prompting him to suggest that one of their own should serve as the judge, which they accepted. Muhammad assigned the role to Sa'd ibn Mu'adh, a man nearing death from an infection in his wounds from the previous Meccan siege. He pronounced that all the men should be put to death, their possessions to be distributed among Muslims, and their women and children to be taken as captives. Muhammad approved this pronouncement saying it aligned with the God's judgement. Consequently, 600\u2013900 men of Banu Qurayza were executed. The women and children were distributed as slaves, with some being transported to Najd to be sold. The proceeds were then utilized to purchase weapons and horses for the Muslims.\nIncidents with the Banu Fazara.\nA few months after the conflict with the Banu Qurayza, Muhammad organized a caravan to conduct trade in Syria. Zayd ibn Haritha was tasked with guarding the convoy. When they journeyed through the territory of Banu Fazara, whom Zayd had raided in the past, the tribe seized the opportunity for revenge, attacking the caravan and injuring him. Upon his return to Medina, Muhammad ordered Zayd to lead a punitive operation against the Fazara in which their matriarch Umm Qirfa was captured and brutally executed.\nTreaty of Hudaybiyya.\nEarly in 628, following a dream of making an unopposed pilgrimage to Mecca, Muhammad embarked on the journey. He was dressed in his customary pilgrim attire and was accompanied by a group of followers. Upon reaching Hudaybiyya, they encountered Quraysh emissaries who questioned their intentions. Muhammad explained they had come to venerate the Kaaba, not to fight. He then sent Uthman, Abu Sufyan's second cousin, to negotiate with the Quraysh. As the negotiations were prolonged, rumors of Uthman's death began to spark, prompting Muhammad to call his followers to renew their oaths of loyalty. Uthman returned with news of a negotiation impasse. Muhammad remained persistent. In the end, the Quraysh sent Suhayl ibn Amr, an envoy with full negotiation powers. Following lengthy discussions, a treaty was finally enacted, with terms:\nInvasion of Khaybar.\nRoughly ten weeks subsequent to his return from Hudaybiyya, Muhammad expressed his plan to invade Khaybar, a flourishing oasis about north of Medina. The city was populated by Jews, including those from the Banu Nadir, who had previously been expelled by Muhammad from Medina. With the prospect of rich spoils from the mission, numerous volunteers answered his call. To keep their movements hidden, the Muslim military chose to march during the nighttime. As dawn arrived and the city folks stepped out of their fortifications to harvest their dates, they were taken aback by the sight of the advancing Muslim forces. Muhammad cried out, \"Allahu Akbar! Khaybar is destroyed. For when we approach a people's land, a terrible morning awaits the warned ones.\" After a strenuous battle lasting more than a month, the Muslims successfully captured the city.\nThe spoils, inclusive of the wives of the slain warriors, were distributed among the Muslims. The chief of the Jews, Kenana ibn al-Rabi, to whom the treasure of Banu al-Nadir was entrusted, denied knowing its whereabouts. After a Jew disclosed his habitual presence around a particular ruin, Muhammad ordered excavations, and the treasure was found. When questioned about the remaining wealth, Kenana refused to divulge it. He was then put through torture by Muhammad's decree and subsequently beheaded by Muhammad ibn Maslamah in revenge for his brother. Muhammad took Kenana's wife, Safiyya bint Huyayy, as his own slave and later advised her to convert to Islam. She accepted and agreed to become Muhammad's wife.\nFollowing their defeat by the Muslims, some of the Jews proposed to Muhammad that they stay and serve as tenant farmers, given the Muslims' lack of expertise and labor force for date palm cultivation. They agreed to give half of the annual produce to the Muslims. Muhammad consented to this arrangement with the caveat that he could displace them at any time. While they were allowed to farm, he demanded the surrender of all gold or silver, executing those who secreted away their wealth. Taking a cue from what transpired in Khaybar, the Jews in Fadak immediately sent an envoy to Muhammad and agreed to the same terms of relinquishing 50% of their annual harvest. However, since no combat occurred, the rank and file had no claim to a portion of the spoils. Consequently, all the loot became Muhammad's exclusive wealth.\nAt the feast following the battle, the meal served to Muhammad was reportedly poisoned. His companion, Bishr, fell dead after consuming it, while Muhammad himself managed to vomit it out after tasting it. The perpetrator was Zaynab bint al-Harith, a Jewish woman whose father, uncle, and husband had been killed by the Muslims. When asked why she did it, she replied, \"You know what you've done to my people... I said to myself: If he is truly a prophet, he will know about the poison. If he's merely a king, I'll be rid of him.\" Muhammad suffered illness for a period due to the poison he ingested, and he endured sporadic pain from it until his death.\nFinal years.\nConquest of Mecca.\nThe truce of Hudaybiyyah was enforced for two years. The tribe of Banu Khuza'ah had good relations with Muhammad, whereas their enemies, the Banu Bakr, had allied with the Meccans. A clan of the Bakr made a night raid against the Khuza'ah, killing a few of them. The Meccans helped the Banu Bakr with weapons and, according to some sources, a few Meccans also took part in the fighting. After this event, Muhammad sent a message to Mecca with three conditions, asking them to accept one of them. These were: either the Meccans would pay blood money for the slain among the Khuza'ah tribe, they disavow themselves of the Banu Bakr, or they should declare the truce of Hudaybiyyah null.\nThe Meccans replied that they accepted the last condition. Soon they realized their mistake and sent Abu Sufyan to renew the Hudaybiyyah treaty, a request that was declined by Muhammad.\nMuhammad began to prepare for a campaign. In 630, Muhammad marched on Mecca with 10,000 Muslim converts. With minimal casualties, Muhammad seized control of Mecca. He declared an amnesty for past offences, except for ten men and women who were \"guilty of murder or other offences or had sparked off the war and disrupted the peace\". Some of these were later pardoned Most Meccans converted to Islam and Muhammad proceeded to destroy all the statues of Arabian gods in and around the Kaaba. According to reports collected by Ibn Ishaq and al-Azraqi, Muhammad personally spared paintings or frescos of Mary and Jesus, but other traditions suggest that all pictures were erased. The Quran discusses the conquest of Mecca.\nSubduing the Hawazin and Thaqif and the expedition to Tabuk.\nUpon learning that Mecca had fallen to the Muslims, the Banu Hawazin gathered their entire tribe, including their families, to fight. They are estimated to have around 4,000 warriors. Muhammad led 12,000 soldiers to raid them, but they surprised him at the valley of Hunayn. The Muslims overpowered them and took their women, children and animals. Muhammad then turned his attention to Taif, a city that was famous for its vineyards and gardens. He ordered them to be destroyed and besieged the city, which was surrounded by walls. After 15\u201320 days of failing to breach their defenses, he abandoned the attempts.\nWhen he divided the plentiful loot acquired at Hunayn among his soldiers, the rest of the Hawazin converted to Islam and implored Muhammad to release their children and women, reminding him that he had been nursed by some of those women when he was a baby. He complied but held on to the rest of the plunder. Some of his men opposed giving away their portions, so he compensated them with six camels each from subsequent raids. Muhammad distributed a big portion of the booty to the new converts from the Quraysh. Abu Sufyan and two of his sons, Mu'awiya and Yazid, got 100 camels individually. The Ansar, who had fought bravely in the battle, but received close to nothing, were unhappy with this. One of them remarked, \"It is not with such gifts that one seeks God's face.\" Disturbed by this utterance, Muhammad retorted, \"He changed color.\"\nRoughly 10 months after he captured Mecca, Muhammad took his army to attack the wealthy border provinces of Byzantine Syria. Several motives are proposed, including avenging the defeat at Mu'tah and earning vast booty. Because of the drought and severe heat at that time, some of the Muslims refrained from participating. This led to the revelation of Quran 9:38 which rebuked those slackers. When Muhammad and his army reached Tabuk, there were no hostile forces present. However, he was able to force some of the local chiefs to accept his rule and pay . A group under Khalid ibn Walid that he sent for a raid also managed to acquire some booty including 2,000 camels and 800 cattle.\nThe Hawazin's acceptance of Islam resulted in Taif losing its last major ally. After enduring a year of unrelenting thefts and attacks from the Muslims following the siege, the people of Taif, known as the Banu Thaqif, finally reached a tipping point and acknowledged that embracing Islam was the most sensible path for them.\nFarewell pilgrimage.\nOn February 631, Muhammad received a revelation granting idolaters four months of grace, after which the Muslims would attack, kill, and plunder them wherever they met.\nDuring the 632 pilgrimage season, Muhammad personally led the ceremonies and gave a sermon. Among the key points highlighted are said to have been the prohibition of usury and vendettas related to past murders from the pre-Islamic era; the brotherhood of all Muslims; and the adoption of twelve lunar months without intercalation.\nDeath.\nAfter praying at the burial site in June 632, Muhammad suffered a dreadful headache that made him cry in pain. He continued to spend the night with each of his wives one by one, but he fainted in Maymunah's hut. He requested his wives to allow him to stay in Aisha's hut. He could not walk there without leaning on Ali and Fadl ibn Abbas, as his legs were trembling. His wives and his uncle al-Abbas fed him an Abyssinian remedy when he was unconscious. When he came to, he inquired about it, and they explained that they were afraid that such a severe fever was a result of pleurisy. He replied that God would not afflict him with such a vile disease, and ordered all the women to also take the remedy. According to various sources, including , Muhammad said that he felt his aorta being severed because of the food he ate at Khaybar. On 8 June 632, Muhammad died. In his last moments, he reportedly uttered:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;O God, forgive me and have mercy on me; and let me join the highest companions.\u2014\u200a\nHistorian Alfred T. Welch, while presuming the illness to be ordinary Medinan fever, with death requiring a dangerous level of comorbidity, restrains his speculation to physical and mental fatigue.\nTomb.\nMuhammad was buried where he died in Aisha's house. During the reign of the Umayyad caliph al-Walid I, the Prophet's Mosque was expanded to include the site of Muhammad's tomb. The Green Dome above the tomb was built by the Mamluk sultan Al Mansur Qalawun in the 13th century, although the green color was added in the 16th century, under the reign of Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent. Among tombs adjacent to that of Muhammad are those of his companions (), the first two Muslim caliphs Abu Bakr and Umar, and an empty one that Muslims believe awaits Jesus.\nWhen Saud bin Abdul-Aziz took Medina in 1805, Muhammad's tomb was stripped of its gold and jewel ornamentation. Adherents to Wahhabism, Saud's followers, destroyed nearly every tomb dome in Medina in order to prevent their veneration, and the one of Muhammad is reported to have narrowly escaped. Similar events took place in 1925, when the Saudi militias retook\u2014and this time managed to keep\u2014the city. In the Wahhabi interpretation of Islam, burial is to take place in unmarked graves. Although the practice is frowned upon by the Saudis, many pilgrims continue to practice a \u2014a ritual visit\u2014to the tomb.\nSuccession.\nWith Muhammad's death, disagreement broke out over who his successor would be. Umar ibn al-Khattab, a prominent companion of Muhammad, nominated Abu Bakr, Muhammad's friend and collaborator. With additional support, Abu Bakr was confirmed as the first caliph. This choice was disputed by some of Muhammad's companions, who held that Ali ibn Abi Talib, his cousin and son-in-law, had been designated the successor by Muhammad at Ghadir Khumm. Abu Bakr immediately moved to strike against the forces of the Byzantine Empire because of the previous defeat, although he first had to put down a rebellion by Arab tribes in an event that Muslim historians later referred to as the Ridda wars, or \"Wars of Apostasy\".\nThe pre-Islamic Middle East was dominated by the Byzantine and Sasanian empires. The Roman\u2013Persian Wars between the two had devastated the region, making the empires unpopular amongst local tribes. Furthermore, in the lands that would be conquered by Muslims, many Christians (Nestorians, Monophysites, Jacobites and Copts) were disaffected from the Eastern Orthodox Church which deemed them heretics. Within a decade Muslims conquered Mesopotamia, Byzantine Syria, Byzantine Egypt, large parts of Persia, and established the Rashidun Caliphate.\nHousehold.\nMuhammad's conjugal life can defined into two periods: pre-hijra in Mecca (570\u2013622), and post-hijra in Medina (622\u2013632). At the age of 25, Muhammad married the wealthy Khadija, who was 40 years old. The marriage lasted for 25\u00a0years and was a happy one. Muhammad did not enter into marriage with another woman during this marriage. After Khadija's death, Khawla bint Hakim suggested to Muhammad that he should marry Sawdah bint Zam'ah, a Muslim widow, or Aisha, daughter of Umm Ruman and Abu Bakr of Mecca. Muhammad is said to have asked for arrangements to marry both. According to classical sources, Muhammad married Aisha when she was 6\u20137 years old; the marriage was consummated later, when she was 9 years old and he was 53 years old.\nMuhammad performed household chores such as preparing food, sewing clothes, and repairing shoes. He is also said to have accustomed his wives to dialogue; he listened to their advice, and the wives debated and even argued with him.\nKhadija is said to have had four daughters with Muhammad (Ruqayya bint Muhammad, Umm Kulthum bint Muhammad, Zainab bint Muhammad, Fatimah Zahra) and two sons (Qasim ibn Muhammad and Abd Allah ibn Muhammad, who both died in childhood). All but one of his daughters, Fatimah, died before him. Some Shia scholars contend that Fatimah was Muhammad's only daughter. Maria al-Qibtiyya bore him a son named Ibrahim ibn Muhammad, who died at two years old.\nNine of Muhammad's wives survived after him. Aisha, who became known as Muhammad's favorite wife in Sunni tradition, survived him by decades and was instrumental in helping assemble the scattered sayings of Muhammad that form the hadith literature for the Sunni branch of Islam.\nZayd ibn Haritha was a slave that Khadija gave to Muhammad. He was bought by her nephew Hakim ibn Hizam at the market in Ukaz. Zayd then became the couple's adopted son, but was later disowned when Muhammad was about to marry Zayd's ex-wife, Zaynab bint Jahsh. According to a BBC summary, \"the Prophet Muhammad did not try to abolish slavery, and bought, sold, captured, and owned slaves himself. But he insisted that slave owners treat their slaves well and stressed the virtue of freeing slaves. Muhammad treated slaves as human beings and clearly held some in the highest esteem\".\nLegacy.\nIslamic tradition.\nFollowing the attestation to the oneness of God, the belief in Muhammad's prophethood is the main aspect of the Islamic faith. Every Muslim proclaims in the : \"I testify that there is no god but God, and I testify that Muhammad is a Messenger of God\". The is the basic creed or tenet of Islam. Islamic belief is that ideally the is the first words a newborn will hear; children are taught it immediately and it will be recited upon death. Muslims repeat the shahadah in the call to prayer () and the prayer itself. Non-Muslims wishing to convert to Islam are required to recite the creed.\nIn Islamic belief, Muhammad is regarded as the last prophet sent by God. Writings such as hadith and attribute several miracles or supernatural events to Muhammad. One of these is the splitting of the Moon, which according to earliest available compilations is a literal splitting of the Moon.\nThe sunnah represents the actions and sayings of Muhammad preserved in hadith and covers a broad array of activities and beliefs ranging from religious rituals, personal hygiene, and burial of the dead to the mystical questions involving the love between humans and God. The sunnah is considered a model of emulation for pious Muslims and has to a great degree influenced the Muslim culture. Many details of major Islamic rituals such as daily prayers, the fasting and the annual pilgrimage are only found in the sunnah and not the Quran.\nMuslims have traditionally expressed love and veneration for Muhammad. Stories of Muhammad's life, his intercession and of his miracles have permeated popular Muslim thought and poetry (). Among Arabic odes to Muhammad, (\"Poem of the Mantle\") by the Egyptian Sufi al-Busiri (1211\u20131294) is particularly well-known, and widely held to possess a healing, spiritual power. The Quran refers to Muhammad as \"a mercy () to the worlds\". The association of rain with mercy in Oriental countries has led to imagining Muhammad as a rain cloud dispensing blessings and stretching over lands, reviving the dead hearts, just as rain revives the seemingly dead earth. Muhammad's birthday is celebrated as a major feast throughout the Muslim world, excluding Wahhabi-dominated Saudi Arabia where these public celebrations are discouraged. When Muslims say or write the name of Muhammad, they usually follow it with the Arabic phrase (\"may God honor him and grant him peace\") or the English phrase \"peace be upon him\". In casual writing, the abbreviations SAW (for the Arabic phrase) or PBUH (for the English phrase) are sometimes used; in printed matter, a small calligraphic rendition is commonly used ().\nAppearance and depictions.\nVarious sources present a probable description of Muhammad in the prime of his life. He was slightly above average in height, with a sturdy frame and wide chest. His neck was long, bearing a large head with a broad forehead. His eyes were described as dark and intense, accentuated by long, dark eyelashes. His hair, black and not entirely curly, hung over his ears. His long, dense beard stood out against his neatly trimmed mustache. His nose was long and aquiline, ending in a fine point. His teeth were well-spaced. His face was described as intelligent, and his clear skin had a line of hair from his neck to his navel. Despite a slight stoop, his stride was brisk and purposeful. Muhammad's lip and cheek were ripped by a slingstone during the Battle of Uhud. The wound was later cauterized, leaving a scar on his face.\nHowever, since the hadith prohibits the creation of images of sentient living beings, Islamic religious art mainly focuses on calligraphy. Muslims generally avoid depictions of Muhammad, and instead decorate mosques with calligraphy, Quranic inscriptions, or geometrical designs. Today, the interdiction against images of Muhammad\u2014designed to prevent worship of Muhammad, rather than God\u2014is much more strictly observed in Sunni Islam (85\u201390% of Muslims) and Ahmadiyya Islam (1%) than among Shias (10\u201315%). While both Sunnis and Shias have created images of Muhammad in the past, Islamic depictions of Muhammad are rare. They have mostly been limited to the private and elite medium of the miniature, and since about 1500 most depictions show Muhammad with his face veiled, or symbolically represent him as a flame.\nThe earliest extant depictions come from 13th century Anatolian Seljuk and Ilkhanid Persian miniatures, typically in literary genres describing the life and deeds of Muhammad. During the Ilkhanid period, when Persia's Mongol rulers converted to Islam, competing Sunni and Shia groups used visual imagery, including images of Muhammad, to promote their particular interpretation of Islam's key events. Influenced by the Buddhist tradition of representational religious art predating the Mongol elite's conversion, this innovation was unprecedented in the Islamic world, and accompanied by a \"broader shift in Islamic artistic culture away from abstraction toward representation\" in \"mosques, on tapestries, silks, ceramics, and in glass and metalwork\" besides books. In the Persian lands, this tradition of realistic depictions lasted through the Timurid dynasty until the Safavids took power in the early 16th century. The Safavaids, who made Shia Islam the state religion, initiated a departure from the traditional Ilkhanid and Timurid artistic style by covering Muhammad's face with a veil to obscure his features and at the same time represent his luminous essence. Concomitantly, some of the unveiled images from earlier periods were defaced. Later images were produced in Ottoman Turkey and elsewhere, but mosques were never decorated with images of Muhammad. Illustrated accounts of the night journey () were particularly popular from the Ilkhanid period through the Safavid era. During the 19th century, Iran saw a boom of printed and illustrated books, with Muhammad's face veiled, aimed in particular at illiterates and children in the manner of graphic novels. Reproduced through lithography, these were essentially \"printed manuscripts\". Today, millions of historical reproductions and modern images are available in some Muslim-majority countries, especially Turkey and Iran, on posters, postcards, and even in coffee-table books, but are unknown in most other parts of the Islamic world, and when encountered by Muslims from other countries, they can cause considerable consternation and offense.\nIslamic social reforms.\nAccording to W. Montgomery Watt, religion for Muhammad was not a private and individual matter but \"the total response of his personality to the total situation in which he found himself. He was responding [not only]... to the religious and intellectual aspects of the situation but also to the economic, social, and political pressures to which contemporary Mecca was subject.\" Bernard Lewis says there are two important political traditions in Islam\u2014Muhammad as a statesman in Medina, and Muhammad as a rebel in Mecca. In his view, Islam is a great change, akin to a revolution, when introduced to new societies.\nHistorians generally agree that Islamic social changes in areas such as social security, family structure, slavery and the rights of women and children improved on the status quo of Arab society. For example, according to Lewis, Islam \"from the first denounced aristocratic privilege, rejected hierarchy, and adopted a formula of the career open to the talents\". Muhammad's message transformed society and moral orders of life in the Arabian Peninsula; society focused on the changes to perceived identity, worldview, and the hierarchy of values. Economic reforms addressed the plight of the poor, which was becoming an issue in pre-Islamic Mecca. The Quran requires payment of an alms tax () for the benefit of the poor; as Muhammad's power grew he demanded that tribes who wished to ally with him implement the zakat in particular.\nEuropean appreciation.\nGuillaume Postel was among the first to present a more positive view of Muhammad when he argued that Muhammad should be esteemed by Christians as a valid prophet. Gottfried Leibniz praised Muhammad because \"he did not deviate from the natural religion\". Henri de Boulainvilliers, in his which was published posthumously in 1730, described Muhammad as a gifted political leader and a just lawmaker. He presents him as a divinely inspired messenger whom God employed to confound the bickering Oriental Christians, to liberate the Orient from the despotic rule of the Romans and Persians, and to spread the knowledge of the unity of God from India to Spain. Voltaire had a mixed opinion on Muhammad: in his play he vilifies Muhammad as a symbol of fanaticism, and in an essay in 1748 he calls him \"a sublime and hearty charlatan\". But in Voltaire's historical survey , he presents Muhammad as a legislator and conqueror and calls him an \"enthusiast\". Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in his \"Social Contract\" (1762), \"brushing aside hostile legends of Muhammad as a trickster and impostor, presents him as a sage legislator who wisely fused religious and political powers\". In Emmanuel Pastoret's 1787 \"Zoroaster, Confucius and Muhammad\", he presents the lives of these three \"great men\", \"the greatest legislators of the universe\", and compares their careers as religious reformers and lawgivers. Pastoret rejects the common view that Muhammad is an impostor and argues that the Quran proffers \"the most sublime truths of cult and morals\"; it defines the unity of God with an \"admirable concision\". Pastoret writes that the common accusations of his immorality are unfounded: on the contrary, his law enjoins sobriety, generosity, and compassion on his followers: the \"legislator of Arabia\" was \"a great man\". Napoleon Bonaparte admired Muhammad and Islam, and described him as a model lawmaker and conqueror. Thomas Carlyle in his book \"On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp; the Heroic in History\" 1841 describes \"Mahomet\" as \"A silent great soul; he was one of those who cannot but be in earnest\". Carlyle's interpretation has been widely cited by Muslim scholars as a demonstration that Western scholarship validates Muhammad's status as a great man in history.\nIan Almond says that German Romantic writers generally held positive views of Muhammad: \"Goethe's 'extraordinary' poet-prophet, Herder's nation builder (...) Schlegel's admiration for Islam as an aesthetic product, enviably authentic, radiantly holistic, played such a central role in his view of Mohammed as an exemplary world-fashioner that he even used it as a scale of judgement for the classical (the dithyramb, we are told, has to radiate pure beauty if it is to resemble 'a Koran of poetry')\". After quoting Heinrich Heine, who said in a letter to some friend that \"I must admit that you, the great prophet of Mecca, are the greatest poet and that your Quran... will not easily escape my memory\", John Tolan goes on to show how Jews in Europe in particular held more nuanced views about Muhammad and Islam, being an ethnoreligious minority feeling discriminated, they specifically lauded Al-Andalus, and thus, \"writing about Islam was for Jews a way of indulging in a fantasy world, far from the persecution and pogroms of nineteenth-century Europe, where Jews could live in harmony with their non-Jewish neighbors\".\nRecent writers such as William Montgomery Watt and Richard Bell dismiss the idea that Muhammad deliberately deceived his followers, arguing that Muhammad \"was absolutely sincere and acted in complete good faith\" and Muhammad's readiness to endure hardship for his cause, with what seemed to be no rational basis for hope, shows his sincerity. Watt, however, says that sincerity does not directly imply correctness: in contemporary terms, Muhammad might have mistaken his subconscious for divine revelation. Watt and Bernard Lewis argue that viewing Muhammad as a self-seeking impostor makes it impossible to understand Islam's development. Alford T. Welch holds that Muhammad was able to be so influential and successful because of his firm belief in his vocation.\nCriticism.\nCriticism of Muhammad has existed since the 7th century, when Muhammad was decried by his non-Muslim Arab contemporaries for preaching monotheism, and by the Jewish tribes of Arabia for his perceived appropriation of Biblical narratives and figures and proclamation of himself as the \"Seal of the Prophets\". In the Middle Ages, Western and Byzantine Christians labeled him a false prophet, the Antichrist, or portrayed him as a heretic. Contemporary criticism involves questioning Muhammad's legitimacy as a prophet, his moral conduct, marriages, ownership of slaves, treatment of enemies, approach to doctrinal matters, and psychological well-being.\nSufism.\nThe sunnah contributed much to the development of Islamic law, particularly from the end of the first Islamic century. Muslim mystics, known as Sufis, who were seeking for the inner meaning of the Quran and the inner nature of Muhammad, viewed the prophet of Islam not only as a prophet but also as a perfect human being. All Sufi orders trace their chain of spiritual descent back to Muhammad.\nOther religions.\nMuhammad Sahib is honored by Sikhs as one of the divine messengers sent to mankind, along with Moses, Jesus and others. Guru Granth Sahib, the holiest book of Sikhism, states that a true Muslim who follows the faith of Muhammad would put aside the \"delusion of death and life.\" The founder of Sikhism, Guru Nanak, is specifically said to have praised Muhammad as a source of divine experience having a personal influence on his life, as stated in the of Bhai Bala.\nFollowers of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith venerate Muhammad as one of a number of prophets or \"Manifestations of God\". He is thought to be the final manifestation, or seal of the Adamic cycle, but consider his teachings to have been superseded by those of Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h, the founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed faith, and the first manifestation of the current cycle.\nDruze tradition honors several \"mentors\" and \"prophets\", and Muhammad is considered an important prophet of God in the Druze faith, being among the seven prophets who appeared in different periods of history.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEncyclopaedia of Islam.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18935", "revid": "47351360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18935", "title": "Morse code", "text": "Transmission of language with brief pulses\nMorse code is a telecommunications method which encodes text characters as standardized sequences of two different signal durations, called \"dots\" and \"dashes\", or \"dits\" and \"dahs\". It is named after Samuel Morse, one of several developers of the system. Morse's preliminary proposal for a telegraph code was replaced by an alphabet-based code developed by Alfred Vail, the engineer working with Morse. Vail's version was used for commercial telegraphy in North America. Friedrich Gerke simplified Vail's code to produce the code adopted in Europe, and most of the alphabetic part of the (ITU) \"Morse\" is copied from Gerke's revision.\nThe ITU International Morse code encodes the 26\u00a0basic Latin letters A to Z, one accented Latin letter (\u00c9), the Indo-Arabic numerals 0 to 9, and some punctuation and messaging procedural signals (prosigns). There is no distinction between upper and lower case letters. Each code symbol is formed by a sequence of \"dits\" and \"dahs\". The \"dit\" duration can vary for signal clarity and operator skill, but for any one message, once the rhythm is established, a half-beat is the basic unit of time measurement. The duration of a \"dah\" is three times the duration of a \"dit\". Each \"dit\" or \"dah\" within an encoded character is followed by a period of signal absence, called a \"space\", equal to the \"dit\" duration. The letters of a word are separated by a space of duration equal to three \"dits\", and words are separated by a space equal to seven \"dits\".\nMorse code can be memorized and sent in a form perceptible to the human senses, e.g. via sound waves or visible light, such that it can be directly interpreted by persons trained in it. Morse code is usually transmitted by on-off keying of an information-carrying medium such as electric current, radio waves, visible light, or sound waves. The current or wave is present during the time period of the \"dit\" or \"dah\" and absent during the time between \"dits\" and \"dahs\". Since many natural languages use more than the 26\u00a0letters of the Latin alphabet, Morse alphabets have been developed for those, largely by transliteration of existing codes.\nTo increase transmission efficiency, Vail designed the original alphabetic code so the duration of each symbol was approximately inverse to the frequency that the character it represents occurs in English text. After revisions that led to ITU Morse code, the assignment of codes to characters in a few cases became non-optimal, although many encodings are. For instance, the most common letter in English, E, has the shortest code \u2013 a single \"dit\". Because code elements are specified relatively, by proportion, rather than fixed duration, the code is usually sent at the highest rate the receiver is capable of decoding.\nDevelopment and history.\nPre-Morse telegraphs and codes.\nEarly in the nineteenth century, European experimenters made progress with electrical signaling systems, using a variety of techniques including static electricity and electricity from Voltaic piles producing electrochemical and electromagnetic changes. These experimental designs were precursors to practical telegraphic applications.\nFollowing the discovery of electromagnetism by Hans Christian \u00d8rsted in 1820 and the invention of the electromagnet by William Sturgeon in 1824, there were developments in electromagnetic telegraphy in Europe and America. Pulses of electric current were sent along wires to control an electromagnet in the receiving instrument. Many of the earliest telegraph systems used a single-needle system which gave a very simple and robust instrument. However, it was slow, as the receiving operator had to alternate between looking at the needle and writing down the message. In Morse code, a deflection of the needle to the left corresponded to a \"dit\" and a deflection to the right to a \"dah\". The needle clicked each time it moved to the right or left. By making the two clicks sound different (by installing one ivory and one metal stop), transmissions on the single needle device became audible as well as visible, which led in turn to the \"Double Plate Sounder\" System.\nWilliam Cooke and Charles Wheatstone in Britain developed an electrical telegraph that used electromagnets in its receivers. They obtained an English patent in June\u00a01837 and demonstrated it on the London and Birmingham Railway, making it the first commercial telegraph. Carl Friedrich Gauss and Wilhelm Eduard Weber (1833) as well as Carl August von Steinheil (1837) used codes with varying word lengths for their telegraph systems. In 1841, Cooke and Wheatstone built a telegraph that printed the letters from a wheel of typefaces struck by a hammer.79\nSamuel Morse and Alfred Vail.\nThe American artist Samuel Morse, the American physicist Joseph Henry, and mechanical engineer Alfred Vail developed an electrical telegraph system. The simple \"on or off\" nature of its signals made it desirable to find a method of transmitting natural language using only electrical pulses and the silence between them. Around 1837, Morse therefore developed such a method, an early forerunner to the modern International Morse code.79\nThe Morse system for telegraphy was designed to make indentations on a paper tape when electric currents were received. Morse's original telegraph receiver used a mechanical clockwork to move a paper tape. When an electrical current was received, an electromagnet engaged an armature that pushed a stylus onto the moving paper tape, making an indentation on the tape. When the current was interrupted, a spring retracted the stylus and that portion of the moving tape remained unmarked. \nIn his earliest design for a code, Morse had planned to transmit only numerals, and to use a codebook to look up each word according to the number which had been sent. However, the code was soon expanded by Alfred Vail in 1840 to include letters and special characters, so it could be used more generally. Vail estimated the letter frequency of English by counting the movable type he found in the type cases of a local newspaper in Morristown, New Jersey.84 The shorter marks were called \"dots\" and the longer ones \"dashes\", and the letters most commonly used were assigned the shortest sequences of dots and dashes. This code, first used in 1844, was what later became known as \"Morse landline code\", \"American Morse code\", or \"Railroad Morse\", until the end of railroad telegraphy in the U.S. in the 1970s.\nOperator-led change from graphical to audible code.\nIn the original Morse telegraph system, the receiver's armature made a clicking noise as it moved in and out of position to mark the paper tape. Early telegraph operators soon learned that they could translate the clicks directly into dots and dashes, and write these down by hand, thus making the paper tape unnecessary. When Morse code was adapted to radio communication, the dots and dashes were sent as short and long tone pulses.\nLater telegraphy training found that people become more proficient at receiving Morse code when it is taught \"like a language\", with each code perceived as a whole \"word\" instead of a sequence of separate dots and dashes, such as might be shown on a page.\nWith the advent of tones produced by radiotelegraph receivers, the operators began to vocalize a dot as \"dit\", and a dash as \"dah\", to reflect the sounds of Morse code they heard. To conform to normal sending speed, \"dits\" which are not the last element of a code became voiced as \"di\". For example, the letter L (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0) is voiced as \"di dah di dit\". Morse code was sometimes facetiously known as \"iddy-umpty\", a \"dit\" lampooned as \"iddy\" and a \"dah\" as \"umpty\", leading to the word \"umpteen\".\nGerke's refinement of Morse's code.\nThe Morse code, as specified in the current international standard, \"International Morse Code Recommendation\", ITU-R\u00a0M.1677-1, was derived from a much-improved proposal by Friedrich Gerke in 1848 that became known as the \"Hamburg alphabet\", its only real defect being the use of an excessively long code (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0 and later the equal duration code &lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0) for the frequently used vowel O.\nGerke changed many of the codepoints, in the process doing away with the different length dashes and different inter-element spaces of American Morse, leaving only two coding elements, the dot and the dash. Codes for German umlauted vowels and CH were introduced. Gerke's code was adopted in Germany and Austria in 1851.\nThis finally led to the International Morse code in 1865. The International Morse code adopted most of Gerke's codepoints. The codes for O and P were taken from a code system developed by Steinheil. A new codepoint was added for J since Gerke did not distinguish between I and J. Changes were also made to X, Y, and Z. The codes for the digits 0\u20139 in International Morse were completely revised from both Vail's original and Gerke's revised encodings. This left only four codes identical to the original Morse code, namely E, H, K, and N; and K and N had their original short \"dahs\" extended to full length.\nRadiotelegraphy and aviation.\nIn the 1890s, Morse code began to be used extensively for early radio communication before it was possible to transmit voice. In the late 19th and early 20th\u00a0centuries, most high-speed international communication used Morse code on telegraph lines, undersea cables, and radio circuits.\nAlthough previous transmitters were bulky and the spark gap system of transmission was dangerous and difficult to use, there had been some early attempts: In 1910, the U.S. Navy experimented with sending Morse from an airplane. However the first regular aviation radiotelegraphy was on airships, which had space to accommodate the large, heavy radio equipment then in use. The same year, 1910, a radio on the airship \"America\" was instrumental in coordinating the rescue of its crew.\nDuring World War\u00a0I, Zeppelin airships equipped with radio were used for bombing and naval scouting, and ground-based radio direction finders were used for airship navigation. Allied airships and military aircraft also made some use of radiotelegraphy.\nHowever, there was little aeronautical radio in general use during World War I, and in the 1920s, there was no radio system used by such important flights as that of Charles Lindbergh from New York to Paris in 1927. Once he and the \"Spirit of St. Louis\" were off the ground, Lindbergh was truly incommunicado and alone. Morse code in aviation began regular use in the mid-1920s. By 1928, when the first airplane flight was made by the \"Southern Cross\" from California to Australia, one of its four crewmen was a radio operator who communicated with ground stations via radio telegraph.\nBeginning in the 1930s, both civilian and military pilots were required to be able to use Morse code, both for use with early communications systems and for identification of navigational beacons that transmitted continuous two- or three-letter identifiers in Morse code. Aeronautical charts show the identifier of each navigational aid next to its location on the map.\nIn addition, rapidly moving field armies could not have fought effectively without radiotelegraphy; they moved more quickly than their communications services could put up new telegraph and telephone lines. This was seen especially in the blitzkrieg offensives of the Nazi German Wehrmacht in Poland, Belgium, France (in 1940), the Soviet Union, and in North Africa; by the British Army in North Africa, Italy, and the Netherlands; and by the U.S. Army in France and Belgium (in 1944), and in southern Germany in 1945.\nMaritime flash telegraphy and radio telegraphy.\nRadiotelegraphy using Morse code was vital during World War II, especially in carrying messages between the warships and the naval bases of the belligerents. Long-range ship-to-ship communication was by radio telegraphy, using encrypted messages because the voice radio systems on ships then were quite limited in both their range and their security. Radiotelegraphy was also extensively used by warplanes, especially by long-range patrol planes that were sent out by navies to scout for enemy warships, cargo ships, and troop ships.\nMorse code was used as an international standard for maritime distress until 1999 when it was replaced by the Global Maritime Distress and Safety System. When the French Navy ceased using Morse code on 31\u00a0January 1997, the final message transmitted was \"Calling all. This is our last call before our eternal silence.\"\nDemise of commercial telegraphy.\nIn the United States the final commercial Morse code transmission was on 12\u00a0July 1999, signing off with Samuel Morse's original 1844 message, WHAT HATH GOD WROUGHT, and the prosign SK (\"end of contact\").\nAs of 2015[ [update]], the United States Air Force still trains ten people a year in Morse.\nThe United States Coast Guard has ceased all use of Morse code on the radio, and no longer monitors any radio frequencies for Morse code transmissions, including the international medium frequency (MF) distress frequency of However, the Federal Communications Commission still grants commercial radiotelegraph operator licenses to applicants who pass its code and written tests. Licensees have reactivated the old California coastal Morse station KPH and regularly transmit from the site under either this call sign or as KSM. Similarly, a few U.S. museum ship stations are operated by Morse enthusiasts.\nOperator proficiency.\nMorse code speed is measured in words per minute (WPM) or characters per minute (CPM). Characters have differing lengths because they contain differing numbers of \"dits\" and \"dahs\". Consequently, words also have different lengths in terms of dot duration, even when they contain the same number of characters. For this reason, some standard word is adopted for measuring operators' transmission speeds: Two such standard words in common use are PARIS and CODEX. Operators skilled in Morse code can often understand (\"copy\") code in their heads at rates in excess of 40\u00a0WPM.\nIn addition to knowing, understanding, and being able to copy the standard written alpha-numeric and punctuation characters or symbols at high speeds, skilled high-speed operators must also be fully knowledgeable of all of the special unwritten Morse code symbols for the standard Prosigns for Morse code and the meanings of these special procedural signals in standard Morse code communications protocol.\nInternational contests in code copying are still occasionally held. In July\u00a01939 at a contest in Asheville, North Carolina in the United States, Theodore Roosevelt McElroy (W1JYN) set a still-standing record for Morse copying, 75.2\u00a0WPM. Pierpont (2004) also notes that some operators may have passed 100\u00a0WPM. By this time, they are \"hearing\" phrases and sentences rather than words. The fastest speed ever sent by a straight key was achieved in 1942 by Harry Turner (W9YZE) (d. 1992) who reached 35\u00a0WPM in a demonstration at a U.S. Army base. To accurately compare code copying speed records of different eras it is useful to keep in mind that different standard words (50\u00a0dit durations versus 60\u00a0dit durations) and different interword gaps (5\u00a0dit durations versus 7\u00a0dit durations) may have been used when determining such speed records. For example, speeds run with the CODEX standard word and the PARIS standard may differ by up to 20%.\nToday among amateur operators there are several organizations that recognize high-speed code ability, one group consisting of those who can copy Morse at 60\u00a0WPM. Also, Certificates of Code Proficiency are issued by several amateur radio societies, including the American Radio Relay League. Their basic award starts at 10\u00a0WPM with endorsements as high as 40\u00a0WPM, and are available to anyone who can copy the transmitted text. Members of the Boy Scouts of America may put a Morse interpreter's strip on their uniforms if they meet the standards for translating code at 5\u00a0WPM.\nThrough May\u00a02013, the First, Second, and Third Class (commercial) Radiotelegraph Licenses using code tests based upon the CODEX standard word were still being issued in the United States by the Federal Communications Commission. The First Class license required 20\u00a0WPM code group and 25\u00a0WPM text code proficiency, the others 16\u00a0WPM code group test (five letter blocks sent as simulation of receiving encrypted text) and 20\u00a0WPM code text (plain language) test. It was also necessary to pass written tests on operating practice and electronics theory. A unique additional demand for the First Class was a requirement of a year of experience for operators of shipboard and coast stations using Morse. This allowed the holder to be chief operator on board a passenger ship. However, since 1999 the use of satellite and very high-frequency maritime communications systems (GMDSS) has made them obsolete. (By that point meeting experience requirement for the First was very difficult.)\nCurrently, only one class of license, the Radiotelegraph Operator License, is issued. This is granted either when the tests are passed or as the Second and First are renewed and become this lifetime license. For new applicants, it requires passing a written examination on electronic theory and radiotelegraphy practices, as well as 16\u00a0WPM code-group and 20\u00a0WPM text tests. However, the code exams are currently waived for holders of Amateur Extra Class licenses who obtained their operating privileges under the old 20\u00a0WPM test requirement.\nInternational Morse code.\nMorse codes of one version or another have been in use for more than 160\u00a0years \u2014 longer than any other electrical message encoding system. What is today called \"Morse code\" is different from what was originally actually developed by Vail and Morse. The Modern International Morse code, or \"continental code\", was created by Friedrich Clemens Gerke in 1848 and initially used for telegraphy between Hamburg and Cuxhaven in Germany. Gerke changed nearly half of the alphabet and all of the numerals, providing the foundation for the modern form of the code. After some minor changes to the letters and a complete revision of the numerals, International Morse Code was standardized by the International Telegraphy Congress in 1865 in Paris, and later became the standard adopted by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Morse and Vail's final code specification, however, was only really used for land-line telegraphy in the United States and Canada, with the International code used everywhere else, including all ships at sea and sailing in North American waters. Vail's version became known as \"American Morse code\" or \"railroad code\", and is now almost never used, with the possible exception of historical re-enactments.\nAviation.\nIn aviation, pilots use radio navigation aids. To allow pilots to ensure that the stations they intend to use are serviceable, the stations transmit a set of identification letters (usually a two-to-five-letter version of the station name) in Morse code. Station identification letters are shown on air navigation charts. For example, the VOR-DME based at Vilo Acu\u00f1a Airport in Cayo Largo del Sur, Cuba is identified by \"UCL\", and Morse code UCL is repeatedly transmitted on its radio frequency.\nIn some countries, during periods of maintenance, the facility may instead transmit the signal TEST (), or the identification may be removed, which tells pilots and navigators that the station is unreliable. In Canada, the identification is removed entirely to signify the navigation aid is not to be used.\nIn the aviation service, Morse is typically sent at a very slow speed of about 5\u00a0words per minute. In the U.S., pilots do not actually have to know Morse to identify the transmitter because the dot/dash sequence is written out next to the transmitter's symbol on aeronautical charts. Some modern navigation receivers automatically translate the code into displayed letters.\nAmateur radio.\nInternational Morse code today is most popular among amateur radio operators, in the mode commonly referred to as \"continuous wave\" or \"CW\".\nOther, faster keying methods are available in radio telegraphy, such as frequency-shift keying (FSK).\nThe original amateur radio operators used Morse code exclusively since voice-capable radio transmitters did not become commonly available until around 1920. Until 2003, the International Telecommunication Union mandated Morse code proficiency as part of the amateur radio licensing procedure worldwide. However, the World Radiocommunication Conference of 2003 made the Morse code requirement for amateur radio licensing optional. Many countries subsequently removed the Morse requirement from their license requirements.\nUntil 1991, a demonstration of the ability to send and receive Morse code at a minimum of five words per minute (WPM) was required to receive an amateur radio license for use in the United States from the Federal Communications Commission. Demonstration of this ability was still required for the privilege to use the shortwave bands. Until 2000, proficiency at the 20\u00a0WPM level was required to receive the highest level of amateur license (Amateur Extra Class); effective April 15, 2000, in the FCC reduced the Extra Class requirement to 5\u00a0WPM. Finally, effective on February 23, 2007, the FCC eliminated the Morse code proficiency requirements from all amateur radio licenses.\nWhile voice and data transmissions are limited to specific amateur radio bands under U.S. rules, Morse code is permitted on all amateur bands: LF, MF low, MF high, HF, VHF, and UHF. In some countries, certain portions of the amateur radio bands are reserved for transmission of Morse code signals only.\nBecause Morse code transmissions employ an on-off keyed radio signal, it requires less complex equipment than other radio transmission modes. Morse code also uses less bandwidth (typically only 100\u2013150\u00a0Hz wide, although only for a slow data rate) than voice communication (roughly 2,400~2,800\u00a0Hz used by SSB voice).\nMorse code is usually received as a high-pitched audio tone, so transmissions are easier to copy than voice through the noise on congested frequencies, and it can be used in very high noise / low signal environments. The fact that the transmitted power is concentrated into a very limited bandwidth makes it possible to use narrow receiver filters, which suppress or eliminate interference on nearby frequencies. The narrow signal bandwidth also takes advantage of the natural aural selectivity of the human brain, further enhancing weak signal readability. This efficiency makes CW extremely useful for DX (long distance) transmissions, as well as for low-power transmissions (commonly called \"QRP operation\", from the Q-code for \"reduce power\"). There are several amateur clubs that require solid high speed copy, the highest of these has a standard of 60\u00a0WPM. The American Radio Relay League offers a code proficiency certification program that starts at 10\u00a0WPM.\nThe relatively limited speed at which Morse code can be sent led to the development of an extensive number of abbreviations to speed communication. These include prosigns, Q codes, and a set of Morse code abbreviations for typical message components. For example, CQ is broadcast to be interpreted as \"seek you\" (I'd like to converse with anyone who can hear my signal). The abbreviations OM (old man), YL (young lady), and XYL (\"ex-young lady\" \u2013 wife) are common. YL or OM is used by an operator when referring to the other operator (regardless of their actual age), and XYL or OM (rather than the expected XYM) is used by an operator when referring to his or her spouse. QTH is \"transmitting location\" (spoken \"my Q.T.H.\" is \"my location\"). The use of abbreviations for common terms permits conversation even when the operators speak different languages.\nAlthough the traditional telegraph key (straight key) is still used by some amateurs, the use of mechanical semi-automatic keyers\n(informally called \"bugs\"), and of fully automatic electronic keyers (called \"single paddle\" and either \"double-paddle\" or \"iambic\" keys) is prevalent today. Software is also frequently employed to produce and decode Morse code radio signals. The ARRL has a readability standard for robot encoders called \"ARRL Farnsworth spacing\" that is supposed to have higher readability for both robot and human decoders. Some programs like WinMorse have implemented the standard.\nOther uses.\nRadio navigation aids such as VORs and NDBs for aeronautical use broadcast identifying information in the form of Morse Code, though many VOR stations now also provide voice identification. Warships, including those of the U.S. Navy, have long used signal lamps to exchange messages in Morse code. Modern use continues, in part, as a way to communicate while maintaining radio silence.\nAutomatic Transmitter Identification System (ATIS) uses Morse code to identify uplink sources of analog satellite transmissions.\nMany amateur radio repeaters identify with Morse, even though they are used for voice communications.\nApplications for the general public.\nAn important application is signalling for help through SOS, \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\". This can be sent many ways: keying a radio on and off, flashing a mirror, toggling a flashlight, and similar methods. The SOS signal is not sent as three separate characters; rather, it is a prosign SOS, and is keyed without gaps between characters. The specific meaning of the SOS prosign is equivalent to \"This is the start of a distress message\" (all other transmissions to go silent for the duration of the message).\nMorse code as an assistive technology.\nMorse code has been employed as an assistive technology, helping people with a variety of disabilities to communicate. For example, the Android operating system versions\u00a05.0 and higher allow users to input text using Morse Code as an alternative to a keypad or handwriting recognition.\nMorse can be sent by persons with severe motion disabilities, as long as they have some minimal motor control. An original solution to the problem that caretakers have to learn to decode has been an electronic typewriter with the codes written on the keys. Codes were sung by users; see the voice typewriter employing Morse or votem.\nMorse code can also be translated by computer and used in a speaking communication aid. In some cases, this means alternately blowing into and sucking on a plastic tube (\"sip-and-puff\" interface). An important advantage of Morse code over row column scanning is that once learned, it does not require looking at a display. Also, it appears faster than scanning.\nIn one case reported in the radio amateur magazine \"QST\", an old shipboard radio operator who had a stroke and lost the ability to speak or write could communicate with his physician (a radio amateur) by blinking his eyes in Morse. Two examples of communication in intensive care units were also published in \"QST magazine\". Another example occurred in 1966 when prisoner of war Jeremiah Denton, brought on television by his North Vietnamese captors, Morse-blinked the word TORTURE. In these two cases, interpreters were available to understand those series of eye-blinks.\nRepresentation, timing, and speeds.\nInternational Morse code is composed of five elements:\u00a73\nNote that the two mark signals, the \"dit\" and \"dah\", are an odd number of \"dits\" long (1 or 3), and the gaps or spaces that always follow them are also odd numbers of \"dits\" (1, 3, or 7). Because of that, any code in ITU International Morse always comes out to an even number of \"dits\" when both the mark and space timing of the whole symbol are counted. That makes ITU Morse have a two-\"dit\"-long staccato beat, which helps telegraphers keep their transmit rate steady.\nTransmission.\nMorse code can be transmitted in a number of ways: Originally as electrical pulses along a telegraph wire, but later extended to an audio tone, a radio signal with short and long tones, or high and low tones, or as a mechanical, audible, or visual signal (e.g. a flashing light) using devices like an Aldis lamp or a heliograph, a common flashlight, or even a car horn. Some mine rescues have used pulling on a rope - a short pull for a dot and a long pull for a \"dah\". Ground forces send messages to aircraft with panel signalling, where a horizontal panel is a dah and a vertical panel a dit.\nMorse messages are generally transmitted by a hand-operated device such as a telegraph key, so there are variations introduced by the skill of the sender and receiver \u2014 more experienced operators can send and receive at faster speeds. In addition, individual operators differ slightly, for example, using slightly longer or shorter \"dahs\" or gaps, perhaps only for particular characters. This is called their \"fist\", and experienced operators can recognize specific individuals by it alone. A good operator who sends clearly and is easy to copy is said to have a \"good fist\". A \"poor fist\" is a characteristic of sloppy or hard to copy Morse code.\nDigital storage.\nMorse code is transmitted using just two states (on and off). Morse code may be represented as a binary code, and that is what telegraph operators do when transmitting messages. Working from the above ITU definition and further defining a bit as a dot time, a Morse code sequence may be crudely represented a combination of the following five bit-strings:\nThe marks and gaps alternate: \"Dits\" and \"dahs\" are always separated by one of the gaps, and that the gaps are always separated by a \"dit\" or a \"dah\".\nA more efficient binary encoding uses only two-bits for each \"dit\" or \"dah\" element, with the 1\u00a0\"dit\"-length pause that must follow after each automatically included for every 2\u00a0bit code. One possible coding is by number value for the length of signal tone sent one could use '01'b for a \"dit\" and the automatic single-dit pause after it, and '11'b for a \"dah\" and the automatic single-\"dit\" following pause, and '00'b for the \"extra\" pause between letters (in effect, an end-of-letter mark). That leaves the code '10'b available for some other purpose, such as an escape character, or to more compactly represent the \"extra\" space between words (an end-of-word mark) instead of '00 00 00'b (only 6\u00a0\"dit\" lengths, since the 7th is automatically inserted as part of the prior \"dit\" or \"dah\").\nAlthough the \"dit\" and inter-letter pauses work out to be the same, for any letter containing a \"dah\", the two-bit encoding uses digital memory more compactly than the direct-conversion bit strings mentioned above. Including the letter-separating spaces, all International Morse letter codes pack into 12\u00a0bits or less (5\u00a0symbols), and most fit into 10\u00a0bits or less (4\u00a0symbols); most of the procedural signs fit into 14\u00a0bits, with a few only needing 12\u00a0bits (5\u00a0symbols); and all digits require exactly 12\u00a0bits.\nFor example, Morse G (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0 + 2\u00a0\"extra\" empty dits for \"end of letter\") would binary-encode as '11'b, '11'b, '01'b, '00'b; when packed it is '1111 0100'b = 'F4'x, which stores into only one byte (two nibbles) (as does every three-element code). The bit encoding for the longer method mentioned earlier the same letter would encode as '1110'b, '1110'b, '1000'b = '1110 1110 1000'b = 'EE8'x, or one-and-a-half bytes (three nibbles). The space saving allows small devices, like portable memory keyers, to have more and longer International Morse code sequences in small, conventional device-driver microprocessors' RAM chips.\nCable code.\nThe very long time constants of 19th and early 20th\u00a0century submarine communications cables required a different form of Morse signalling. Instead of keying a voltage on and off for varying times, the dits and dahs were represented by two polarities of voltage impressed on the cable, for a uniform time.\nTiming.\nBelow is an illustration of timing conventions. The phrase MORSE CODE, in Morse code format, would normally be written something like this, where &lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0 represents \"dahs\" and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u00a0 represents \"dits\":\nNext is the exact conventional timing for this phrase, with representing \"signal on\", and representing \"signal off\", each for the time length of exactly one dit:\nSpoken representation.\nMorse code is often spoken or written with \"dah\" for dashes, \"dit\" for dots located at the end of a character, and \"di\" for dots located at the beginning or internally within the character. Thus, the following Morse code sequence:\nis spoken (or sung):\nFor use on radio, there is little point in learning to read Morse \"written\" in dashes and dots, as above; rather, the \"sounds\" of all of the letters and symbols need to be learned, for both sending and receiving.\nSpeed in words per minute.\nAll Morse code elements depend on the dot / \"dit\" length. A \"dah\" is the length of 3\u00a0dits (with no gaps between), and spacings are specified in number of \"dit\" lengths. An unambiguous method of specifying the transmission speed is to specify the \"dit\" duration as, for example, .\nSpecifying the \"dit\" duration is, however, not the common practice. Usually, speeds are stated in words per minute. That introduces ambiguity because words have different numbers of characters, and characters have different \"dit\" lengths. It is not immediately clear how a specific word rate determines the \"dit\" duration in milliseconds.\nSome method to standardize the transformation of a word rate to a \"dit\" duration is useful. A simple way to do this is to choose a \"dit\" duration that would send a typical word the desired number of times in one minute. If, for example, the operator wanted a character speed of 13\u00a0words per minute, the operator would choose a \"dit\" rate that would send the typical word 13\u00a0times in exactly one minute.\nThe typical word thus determines the \"dit\" length. It is common to assume that a word is 5\u00a0characters long. There are two common typical words: PARIS and CODEX. PARIS mimics a word rate that is typical of natural language words and reflects the benefits of Morse code's shorter code durations for common characters such as E and T. CODEX offers a word rate that is typical of 5\u00a0letter code groups (sequences of random letters). Using the word PARIS as a standard, the number of \"dit\" units is 50 and a simple calculation shows that the \"dit\" length at 20\u00a0words per minute is . Using the word CODEX with 60\u00a0dit units, the \"dit\" length at 20\u00a0words per minute is .\nBecause Morse code is usually sent by hand, it is unlikely that an operator could be that precise with the \"dit\" length, and the individual characteristics and preferences of the operators usually override the standards.\nFor commercial radiotelegraph licenses in the United States, the Federal Communications Commission specifies tests for Morse code proficiency in words per minute and in code groups per minute.\u00a713.207(c), \u00a713.209(d) The FCC specifies that a \"word\" is 5\u00a0characters long. The Commission specifies Morse code test elements at 16\u00a0code groups per minute, 20\u00a0words per minute, 20\u00a0code groups per minute, and 25\u00a0words per minute.\u00a713.203(b) The word per minute rate would be close to the PARIS standard, and the code groups per minute would be close to the CODEX standard.\nWhile the Federal Communications Commission no longer requires Morse code for amateur radio licenses, the old requirements were similar to the requirements for commercial radiotelegraph licenses.\u00a797.503, 1996\nA difference between amateur radio licenses and commercial radiotelegraph licenses is that commercial operators must be able to receive code groups of random characters along with plain language text. For each class of license, the code group speed requirement is slower than the plain language text requirement. For example, for the Radiotelegraph Operator License, the examinee must pass a 20\u00a0word per minute plain text test and a 16\u00a0word per minute code group test.\nBased upon a 50\u00a0dit duration standard word such as PARIS, the time for one \"dit\" duration or one unit can be computed by the formula:\n\"T\" \nwhere: T is the unit time, or \"dit\" duration in milliseconds, and W is the speed in WPM.\nHigh-speed telegraphy contests are held; according to the \"Guinness Book of Records\" in June\u00a02005 at the International Amateur Radio Union's 6th\u00a0World Championship in High Speed Telegraphy in Primorsko, Bulgaria, Andrei Bindasov of Belarus transmitted 230\u00a0Morse code marks of mixed text in one minute.\nFarnsworth speed.\nSometimes, especially while teaching Morse code, the timing rules above are changed so two different speeds are used: A character speed and a text speed. The character speed is how fast each individual letter is sent. The text speed is how fast the entire message is sent. For example, individual characters may be sent at a 13 words-per-minute rate, but the intercharacter and interword gaps may be lengthened so the word rate is only 5\u00a0words per minute.\nUsing different character and text speeds is, in fact, a common practice, and is used in the Farnsworth method of learning Morse code.\nAlternative display of common characters in International Morse code.\nSome methods of teaching Morse code use a dichotomic search table.\nLearning methods.\nPeople learning Morse code using the \"Farnsworth method\" are taught to send and receive letters and other symbols at their full target speed, that is with normal relative timing of the \"dits\", \"dahs\", and spaces within each symbol for that speed. The Farnsworth method is named for Donald R. \"Russ\" Farnsworth, also known by his call sign, W6TTB. However, initially exaggerated spaces between symbols and words are used, to give \"thinking time\" to make the sound \"shape\" of the letters and symbols easier to learn. The spacing can then be reduced with practice and familiarity.\nAnother popular teaching method is the Koch method, invented in 1935 by the German engineer and former stormtrooper Ludwig Koch, which uses the full target speed from the outset but begins with just two characters. Once strings containing those two characters can be copied with 90% accuracy, an additional character is added, and so on until the full character set is mastered.\nIn North America, many thousands of individuals have increased their code recognition speed (after initial memorization of the characters) by listening to the regularly scheduled code practice transmissions broadcast by W1AW, the station at the American Radio Relay League's headquarters or by listening to the archived recordings available at its website. As of 2015,[ [update]] the United States military taught Morse code as an 81\u00a0day self-paced course, having phased out more traditional classes.\nMnemonics.\nVisual mnemonic charts have been devised over the ages. Baden-Powell included one in the Girl Guides handbook in 1918.\nIn the United Kingdom, many people learned the Morse code by means of a series of words or phrases that have the same rhythm as a Morse character. For instance, Q in Morse is \"dah dah di dah\" , which can be memorized by the phrase \"God Save the Queen\", and the Morse for F is \"di di dah dit\" , which can be memorized as \"Did she like it?\"\nLetters, numbers, punctuations, prosigns for Morse code and non-Latin variants.\nCut numbers.\nMost numbers have an unofficial short-form, given in the table below. They are only used when both the sender and the receiver understand that numbers, and not letters, are intended; for example, one often sees the most common R-S-T signal report rendered as 5NN[\u2021] instead of 599.\nTable notes\nProsigns.\nProsigns for Morse code are special (usually) unwritten procedural signals or symbols that are used to indicate changes in communications protocol status or white space text formatting actions. Almost all prosigns are also used to encode special characters, such as [\u202f+\u202f], [\u202f\n\u202f], or [\u202f(\u202f]; the receiving telegrapher must distinguish the character-meaning from the prosign-meaning by context.\nSymbol representations.\nThe symbols [\u202f!\u202f], [\u202f$\u202f], and [\u202f&amp;\u202f] are not defined inside the official ITU-R \"International Morse Code Recommendation\", but informal conventions for them exist. (The [\u202f@\u202f] symbol was formally added in 2004. The [\u202f%\u202f] and [\u202f\u2030\u202f] symbols both have recommended long encodings.)\n This sequence was reported to have been chosen to represent \"A[t] C[ommercial]\", or a letter 'a' inside a swirl represented by a letter 'C'. The new character facilitates sending e\u2011mail addresses by Morse code, and is notable since it is the first official addition to the Morse set of characters since World War I.\n Percent and permille signs should be encoded with zeroes separated by a slash, joined to the preceding number by a dash; so e.g. \"4%\" would be sent as \"4-0/0\", and \"5\u2030\" as \"5-0/00\", and \"6.7%\" as \"6.7-0/0\".\nDiacritics and non-Latin extensions.\nThe typical tactic for creating Morse codes for diacritics and non-Latin alphabetic scripts has been to begin by simply re-using the International Morse codes already used for letters whose sound matches the sound of the local alphabet. Because Gerke code (the predecessor to International Morse) was in official use in central Europe, and included four characters not included in the International Morse standard (\u00c4, \u00d6, \u00dc, and CH), these four have served as a beginning-point for other languages that use an alphabetic script, but require codes for letters not accommodated by International Morse.\nThe usual method has been to first transliterate the sounds represented by the International code and the four unique Gerke codes into the local alphabet, hence Greek, Hebrew, Russian, and Ukrainian Morse codes. If more codes are needed, one can either invent a new code or convert an otherwise unused code from either code set to the non-Latin letter. For example:\nFor Russian and Bulgarian, Russian Morse code maps the Cyrillic characters to four-element codes. Many of those characters are encoded the same as their Latin alphabet look-alikes or sound-alikes (A, O, E, I, T, M, N, R, K, etc.). The Bulgarian alphabet contains 30\u00a0characters, which exactly matches the number of all possible permutations of 1, 2, 3, and 4\u00a0\"dits\" and \"dahs\" (Russian \u042b is used as Bulgarian \u042c, Russian \u042c is used as Bulgarian \u042a). Russian requires two more codes, for the letters \u042d and \u042a which are each encoded with 5\u00a0elements.\nNon-alphabetic scripts require more radical adaption. Japanese Morse code (Wabun code) has a separate encoding for kana script; although many of the codes are used for International Morse, the sounds they represent are mostly unrelated. The Japanese / Wabun code includes special prosigns for switching back-and-forth from International Morse: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0 signals a switch from International Morse to Wabun, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Morse/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u2584\u2584\u00a0\u2584\u00a0 to return from Wabun to International Morse.\nFor Chinese, Chinese telegraph code is used to map Chinese characters to four-digit codes and send these digits out using standard Morse code. Korean Morse code uses the SKATS mapping, originally developed to allow Korean to be typed on western typewriters. SKATS maps hangul characters to arbitrary letters of the Latin script and has no relationship to pronunciation in Korean.\nUnusual variants.\nDuring early World War\u00a0I (1914\u20131916), Germany briefly experimented with 'dotty' and 'dashy' Morse, in essence adding a dot or a dash at the end of each Morse symbol. Each one was quickly broken by Allied SIGINT, and standard Morse was resumed by Spring\u00a01916. Only a small percentage of Western Front (North Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea) traffic was in 'dotty' or 'dashy' Morse during the entire war. In popular culture, this is mostly remembered in the book \"The Codebreakers\" by David Kahn and in the national archives of the UK and Australia (whose SIGINT operators copied most of this Morse variant). Kahn's cited sources come from the popular press and wireless magazines of the time.\nOther variations include forms of \"fractional Morse\" or \"fractionated Morse\", which recombine the characters of the Morse code\u2013encoded message and then encrypt them using a cipher in order to disguise the text.\nDecoding software.\nDecoding software for Morse code ranges from software-defined wide-band radio receivers, coupled to the Reverse Beacon Network, which decodes signals and detects CQ messages on ham bands, to smartphone applications.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18936", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18936", "title": "Mr Driller", "text": ""}
{"id": "18937", "revid": "49770926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18937", "title": "Mapping", "text": "Mapping may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18939", "revid": "50773653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18939", "title": "Emergency contraception", "text": "Birth control measures taken after sexual intercourse\nEmergency contraception (EC) is a birth control measure, used after sexual intercourse to prevent pregnancy.\nThere are different forms of EC. Emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs), sometimes simply referred to as emergency contraceptives (ECs), or the morning-after pill, are medications intended to disrupt or delay ovulation or fertilization, which are necessary for pregnancy.\nIntrauterine devices (IUDs)\u00a0\u2013 usually used as a primary contraceptive method\u00a0\u2013 are sometimes used as the most effective form of emergency contraception. However, the use of IUDs for emergency contraception is relatively rare.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nEmergency contraception is a birth control measure taken to reduce the risk of pregnancy following unprotected sexual intercourse or when other regular contraceptive measures have not worked properly or have not been used correctly. It is intended to be used occasionally and is not the same as medical abortion. Emergency contraception is offered to women who do not wish to conceive but have had unprotected sex on any day of the menstrual cycle, from day 21 after giving birth, or from day five after abortion or miscarriage. Emergency contraception measures include tablets taken by mouth or the insertion of a copper intrauterine device.\nEmergency contraception is not related to medical abortion, which is a drug regimen administered to terminate pregnancies in any trimester.\nEmergency contraceptive pills.\nEmergency contraceptive pills (ECPs) are sometimes referred to as emergency hormonal contraception (EHC). They are taken after unprotected sexual intercourse or the breakage of a condom.\nTypes.\nA variety of emergency contraceptive pills are available, including combined estrogen and progestin pills; progestin-only (levonorgestrel, LNG) pills; and antiprogestin (ulipristal acetate or mifepristone) pills. Progestin-only and anti-progestin pills are available as specifically packaged pills for use as emergency contraceptive pills. Emergency contraceptive pills originally contained higher doses of the same hormones (estrogens, progestins, or both) found in regular combined oral contraceptive pills. Combined estrogen and progestin pills are no longer recommended as dedicated emergency contraceptive pills (because this regimen is less effective and caused more nausea), but certain regular combined oral contraceptive pills (taken 2\u20135 at a time in what was called \"the Yuzpe regimen\") have also been shown to be effective as emergency contraceptive pills.\nProgestin-only emergency contraceptive pills contain levonorgestrel, either as a single tablet (or historically, as a split dose of two tablets taken 12\u00a0hours apart), effective up to 72\u00a0hours after intercourse. Progestin-only ECPs are sold under many different brand names. Progestin-only ECPs are available over-the-counter (OTC) in many countries (e.g. Australia, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Canada, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, India, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, South Africa, Sweden, United States), from a pharmacist without a prescription, and available with a prescription in some other countries.\nThe antiprogestin ulipristal acetate is available as a micronized emergency contraceptive tablet, effective up to 120\u00a0hours after intercourse. Ulipristal acetate ECPs developed by HRA Pharma are available over the counter in Europe and by prescription in over 50 countries under the brand names ellaOne, ella (marketed by Watson Pharmaceuticals in the United States), Duprisal 30, Ulipristal 30, and UPRIS.\nThe antiprogestin mifepristone (also known as RU-486) is available in five countries as a low-dose or mid-dose emergency contraceptive tablet, effective up to 120 hours after intercourse. Low-dose mifepristone ECPs are available by prescription in Armenia, Russia, Ukraine, and Vietnam and from a pharmacist without a prescription in China. Mid-dose mifepristone ECPs are available by prescription in China and Vietnam.\nCombined estrogen (ethinylestradiol) and progestin (levonorgestrel or norgestrel) pills used to be available as dedicated emergency contraceptive pills under several brand names: \"Schering PC4\", \"Tetragynon\", \"Neoprimavlar\", and \"Preven\" (in the United States) but were withdrawn after more effective dedicated progestin-only (levonorgestrel) emergency contraceptive pills with fewer side effects became available. If other more effective dedicated emergency contraceptive pills (levonorgestrel, ulipristal acetate, or mifepristone) are not available, specific combinations of regular combined oral contraceptive pills can be taken in split doses 12\u00a0hours apart (the Yuzpe regimen), effective up to 72\u00a0hours after intercourse.\nThe U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved this off-label use of certain brands of regular combined oral contraceptive pills in 1997. As of 2014, there are 26\u00a0brands of regular combined oral contraceptive pills containing levonorgestrel or norgestrel available in the United States that can be used in the emergency contraceptive Yuzpe regimen, when none of the more effective and better-tolerated options are available.\nEffectiveness.\nUlipristal acetate, and mid-dose mifepristone are both more effective than levonorgestrel, which is more effective than the Yuzpe method.\nThe effectiveness of emergency contraception is expressed as a percentage reduction in pregnancy rate for a single use of EC. Using an example of \"75% effective\", the effectiveness calculation thus: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe progestin-only regimen (using levonorgestrel) has an 89% effectiveness. As of 2006[ [update]], the labeling on the U.S. brand Plan B explained this effectiveness rate by stating, \"Seven out of every eight women who would have gotten pregnant will not become pregnant.\"\nIn 1999, a meta-analysis of eight studies of the combined (Yuzpe) regimen concluded that the best point estimate of effectiveness was 74%. A 2003 analysis of two of the largest combined (Yuzpe) regimen studies, using a different calculation method, found effectiveness estimates of 47% and 53%.\nFor both the progestin-only and Yuzpe regimens, the effectiveness of emergency contraception is highest when taken within 12 hours of intercourse and declines over time.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) suggested that reasonable effectiveness may continue for up to 120 hours (5 days) after intercourse.\nFor 10\u00a0mg of mifepristone taken up to 120 hours (5 days) after intercourse, the combined estimate from three trials was an effectiveness of 83%. A review found that a moderate dose of mifepristone is better than LNG or Yuzpe, with delayed return of menstruation being the main adverse effect of most regimes.\nHRA Pharma changed its packaging information for Norlevo (levonorgestrel 1.5\u00a0mg, which is identical to many other EHCs) in November 2013 warning that according to studies the drug loses effectiveness in women who weigh more than 75\u00a0kg (165\u00a0lb) and is completely ineffective for women who weigh over 80\u00a0kg (176\u00a0lb). After a review by European Medicines Agency, the statement was deleted from the leaflet. The agency communicated that levonorgestrel is safe and effective method of emergency contraception, regardless of body weight.\nSafety.\nThe most common side effect reported by users of emergency contraceptive pills was nausea, reported by 14 to 23% of levonorgestrel-only users and 50.5% of Yuzpe regimen users. Vomiting is much less common and unusual with levonorgestrel-only ECPs (5.6% of levonorgestrel-only users vs 18.8% of 979 Yuzpe regimen users in 1998 WHO trial; 1.4% of 2,720 levonorgestrel-only users in the 2002 WHO trial). Anti-emetics are not routinely recommended with levonorgestrel-only ECPs. If a woman vomits within 2 hours of taking a levonorgestrel-only ECP, she should take a further dose as soon as possible.\nOther common side effects (each reported by less than 20% of levonorgestrel-only users in both the 1998 and 2002 WHO trials) were abdominal pain, fatigue, headache, dizziness, and breast tenderness. Side effects generally resolve within 24 hours, although temporary disruption of the menstrual cycle is commonly experienced. If taken before ovulation, the high doses of progestogen in levonorgestrel treatments may induce progestogen withdrawal bleeding a few days after the pills are taken.\nOne study found that about half of women who used levonorgestrel ECPs experienced bleeding within 7 days of taking the pills. If levonorgestrel is taken after ovulation, it may increase the length of the luteal phase, thus delaying menstruation by a few days. Mifepristone, if taken before ovulation, may delay ovulation by 3\u20134 days (delayed ovulation may result in a delayed menstruation). These disruptions only occur in the cycle in which ECPs were taken; subsequent cycle length is not significantly affected. If a woman's menstrual period is delayed by two weeks or more, it is advised that she take a pregnancy test. (Earlier testing may not give accurate results.)\nExisting pregnancy is not a contraindication in terms of safety, as there is no known harm to the woman, the course of her pregnancy, or the fetus if progestin-only or combined emergency contraception pills are accidentally used, but EC is not indicated for a woman with a known or suspected pregnancy because it is not effective in women who are already pregnant.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) lists no medical condition for which the risks of emergency contraceptive pills outweigh the benefits. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and experts on emergency contraception have concluded that progestin-only ECPs are preferable to combined ECPs containing estrogen for all women, and particularly those with a history of blood clots, stroke, or migraine.\nThere are no medical conditions in which progestin-only ECPs are contraindicated. Current venous thromboembolism, current or history of breast cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, and acute intermittent porphyria are conditions where the advantages of using emergency contraceptive pills generally outweigh the theoretical or proven risks.\nECPs, like all other contraceptives, reduce the absolute risk of ectopic pregnancy by preventing pregnancies and there is no increase in the relative risk of ectopic pregnancy in women who become pregnant after using progestin-only ECPs.\nInteractions.\nThe herbal preparation of St John's wort and some enzyme-inducing drugs (e.g. anticonvulsants or rifampicin) may reduce the effectiveness of ECP, and a larger dose may be required, especially in women who weigh more than 165\u00a0lbs.\nIntrauterine device.\nAn effective emergency contraception measure is the copper-T intrauterine device (IUD) which is generally recommended up to 5 days after unprotected intercourse or up to 5 days after probable ovulation. Some studies have found it to be effective up to 10 days after unprotected intercourse to prevent pregnancy. A 2021 study found that the hormonal IUD was as effective at emergency contraception as the copper IUD, though it is not offered by clinicians at the moment due to the lack of research done into the subject.\nInsertion of an IUD is more effective than the use of emergency contraceptive pills\u00a0\u2013 pregnancy rates when used as emergency contraception are the same as with normal IUD use. Unlike emergency contraceptive pills, which work by delaying ovulation, the copper-T IUD works by interfering with sperm motility. Therefore, the copper IUD is equally effective as emergency contraception at all weight ranges. IUDs may be left in place following the subsequent menstruation to provide ongoing contraception for as long as desired (12+ years).\nAs regular contraception.\nOne brand of levonorgestrel pills was marketed as an ongoing method of postcoital contraception. However, with typical use, failure rates are expected to be higher than with the use of other birth control methods.\nLike all hormonal methods, postcoital high-dose progestin-only oral contraceptive pills do not protect against sexually transmitted infections.\nECPs are generally recommended for backup or \"emergency\" use\u00a0\u2013 for example, if a woman has forgotten to take a birth control pill or when a condom is torn during sex. However, for women facing reproductive coercion, who are not able to use regular birth control, repeated use of EC pills may be the most viable option available.\nHigh-risk sex and abortion.\nMaking ECPs more widely available does not increase sexual risk-taking. While they are effective for individuals who use them in a timely fashion, the availability of EC pills does not appear to decrease abortion rates at the population level.\nIn 2012 the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) stated: \"Despite multiple studies showing no increased risk behaviour and evidence that hormonal emergency contraception will not disrupt an established pregnancy, public and medical discourse reflects that personal values of physicians and pharmacists continue to affect emergency-contraception access, particularly for adolescents.\"\nEC and sexual assault.\nBeginning in the 1960s, women who had been sexually assaulted were offered diethylstilbestrol (DES). Currently, the standard of care is to offer ulipristal or prompt placement of a copper IUD which is the most effective form of EC. However, adherence to these best practices varies by the emergency department. Before these EC options were available (in 1996), pregnancy rates among females of child-bearing age who had been raped were around 5%. Although EC is recommended following sexual assault, room for improvement in clinical practice remains.\nMechanism of action.\nThe primary mechanism of action of progestogen-only emergency contraceptive pills is to prevent fertilization by inhibition of ovulation. The best available evidence is that they do not have any post-fertilization effects such as the prevention of implantation. The U.S. FDA-approved labels and European EMA-approved labels (except for HRA Pharma's \"NorLevo\") levonorgestrel emergency contraceptive pills (based on labels for regular oral contraceptive pills) say they may cause endometrial changes that discourage implantation. Daily use of regular oral contraceptive pills can alter the endometrium (although this has not been proven to interfere with implantation), but the isolated use of a levonorgestrel emergency contraceptive pill does not have time to alter the endometrium.\nIn March 2011, the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) issued a statement that: \"review of the evidence suggests that LNG [levonorgestreol] ECPs cannot prevent implantation of a fertilized egg. Language on implantation should not be included in LNG ECP product labeling.\" In June 2012, a \"New York Times\" editorial called on the FDA to remove from the label the unsupported suggestion that levonorgestrel emergency contraceptive pills inhibit implantation. In November 2013, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) approved a change to the label for HRA Pharma's \"NorLevo\" saying it cannot prevent implantation of a fertilized egg.\nProgestogen-only emergency contraceptive does not appear to affect the function of the fallopian tubes or increase the rate of ectopic pregnancies.\nThe primary mechanism of action of progesterone receptor modulator emergency contraceptive pills like low-dose and mid-dose mifepristone and ulipristal acetate is to prevent fertilization by inhibition or delay of ovulation. One clinical study found that post-ovulatory administration of ulipristal acetate altered the endometrium, but whether the changes would inhibit implantation is unknown. The European EMA-approved labels for ulipristal acetate emergency contraceptive pills do not mention an effect on implantation, but the U.S. FDA-approved label says: \"alterations to the endometrium that may affect implantation may also contribute to efficacy.\"\nThe primary mechanism of action of copper-releasing intrauterine devices (IUDs) as emergency contraceptives is to prevent fertilization because of copper toxicity to sperm and ova. The very high effectiveness of copper-releasing IUDs as emergency contraceptives implies that they must also prevent some pregnancies by post-fertilization effects such as prevention of implantation.\nHistory.\nIn 1966, gynecologist John McLean Morris and biologist Gertrude Van Wagenen at the Yale School of Medicine, reported the successful use of oral high-dose estrogen pills as post-coital contraceptives in women and rhesus macaque monkeys, respectively. A few different drugs were studied, with a focus on high-dose estrogens, and it was originally hoped that postcoital contraception would prove viable as an ongoing contraceptive method.\nThe first widely used methods were five-day treatments with high-dose estrogens, using diethylstilbestrol (DES) in the US and ethinylestradiol in the Netherlands by Haspels.\nIn the early 1970s, the Yuzpe regimen was developed by A. Albert Yuzpe in 1974; progestin-only postcoital contraception was investigated (1975); and the copper IUD was first studied for use as emergency contraception (1975). Danazol was tested in the early 1980s in the hopes that it would have fewer side effects than Yuzpe, but was found to be ineffective.\nThe Yuzpe regimen became the standard course of treatment for postcoital contraception in many countries in the 1980s. The first prescription-only combined estrogen-progestin dedicated product, Schering PC4 (ethinylestradiol and norgestrel), was approved in the UK in January 1984 and first marketed in October 1984. Schering introduced a second prescription-only combined product, Tetragynon (ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel) in Germany in 1985. By 1997, Schering AG dedicated prescription-only combined products had been approved in only 9 countries: the UK (Schering PC4), New Zealand (Schering PC4), South Africa (E-Gen-C), Germany (Tetragynon), Switzerland (Tetragynon), Denmark (Tetragynon), Norway (Tetragynon), Sweden (Tetragynon) and Finland (Neoprimavlar); and had been withdrawn from marketing in New Zealand in 1997 to prevent it being sold over-the-counter. Regular combined oral contraceptive pills (which were less expensive and more widely available) were more commonly used for the Yuzpe regimen even in countries where dedicated products were available.\nOver time, interest in progestin-only treatments increased. The Special Program on Human Reproduction (HRP), an international organization whose members include the World Bank and World Health Organization, \"played a pioneering role in emergency contraception\" by \"confirming the effectiveness of levonorgestrel.\" After the WHO conducted a large trial comparing Yuzpe and levonorgestrel in 1998, combined estrogen-progestin products were gradually withdrawn from some markets (\"Preven\" in the United States discontinued May 2004, \"Schering PC4\" in the UK discontinued October 2001, and \"Tetragynon\" in France) in favor of progestin-only EC, although prescription-only dedicated Yuzpe regimen products are still available in some countries.\nIn 2002, China became the first country in which mifepristone was registered for use as EC.\nIn 2020, Japan announced it would consider easing regulations on the sale of emergency contraceptive pills without a prescription. Non-profit groups submitted a petition to the health ministry calling for prescription-free access to the pill. They had collected more than 100,000 signatures.\nCalculating effectiveness.\nEarly studies of emergency contraceptives did not attempt to calculate a failure rate; they simply reported the number of women who became pregnant after using an emergency contraceptive. Since 1980, clinical trials of emergency contraception have first calculated probable pregnancies in the study group if no treatment were given. The effectiveness is calculated by dividing observed pregnancies by the estimated number of pregnancies without treatment.\nPlacebo-controlled trials that could give a precise measure of the pregnancy rate without treatment would be unethical, so the effectiveness percentage is based on estimated pregnancy rates. These are currently estimated using variants of the calendar method.\nWomen with irregular cycles for any reason (including recent hormone use such as oral contraceptives and breastfeeding) must be excluded from such calculations. Even for women included in the calculation, the limitations of calendar methods of fertility determination have long been recognized. In their February 2014 emergency review article, Trussell and Raymond note:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1999, hormonal assay was suggested as a more accurate method of estimating fertility for EC studies.\nAvailability.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom was reported to have caused \"significant disruption\" to contraceptive services in the United Kingdom.\nUnited States.\nAfter \"Roe v. Wade\" and \"Doe v. Bolton\" resulted in the U.S. Supreme Court's 1973 ruling to legalize abortion, both Federal and State laws were created to allow medical professionals and institutions the right to deny reproductive health services without financial, professional, or legal penalty. \"Roe v. Wade\" caused a historical survey to be conducted and concluded that right to privacy cases such as \"Griswold v. Connecticut\" allowed women to have parental control over childrearing, including the use of contraception for reproductive autonomy. After this, women became more informed about contraceptives and began requesting them more often.\nAlmost all 50 states have implemented policies on sterilization, contraceptives, and abortion services. Since the late 1990s, due to rights given by specific policies, the dispensation of emergency contraceptives on issues of religious and moral objections of providing care has extended from doctors, nurses, and hospitals to pharmacies and individual pharmacists. Furthermore, many states have insurance policies that cover contraceptives alongside all other prescription drugs, but may have exemptions for employers or private insurers on religious grounds. Different state legislatures have taken different routes in broadening access to emergency contraceptives. In some states, if a woman has been sexually assaulted, it is mandatory to provide her access to EC. In other states, women have been allowed various amounts of access, including the ability to access EC without a prescription from a physician, creation of policies limiting the ability of pharmacists to deny EC on religious and moral grounds, and creation of policies discouraging pharmacists from denying to fill contraceptive prescriptions. One state even requires all pharmacies to stock and fill every method of contraception. However, other states have restricted access of emergency contraception from state Medicaid family planning eligibility expansions or contraceptive coverage mandates, or by allowing the refusal of providing contraceptive services by healthcare professionals.\nUnder federal law, a provision of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 has guaranteed coverage of contraceptives, applying to most private health plans nationwide. The provision has also specifically required coverage for 18 methods of contraception used by women, related counselling and services, and requires the coverage provided not to be an out-of-pocket cost to the people. In October 2017, however, the Trump administration made it easier for employers that offer health care plans to exclude contraceptive coverage. The two regulations that allow employers to reject contraceptive coverage are religious and moral objection, but the courts have blocked the enforcement of these regulations. As of today, 29 states require that if insurance covers prescription drugs, it has to provide FDA-approved prescription contraceptive drugs and devices. 10 states prohibit the restriction and delay by insurers or medical management techniques to access contraceptives, and 8 states do not permit refusal on religious or moral grounds by any employers or insurerers. However, 21 states do allow the refusal to comply with the contraceptive coverage mandates, and 14 states prohibit cost sharing for contraceptives.\nEmergency contraceptives are the most common prescription drug denied by a pharmacist due to their religious or moral beliefs. There have been cases where hormones, drugs and devices used to treat human immunodeficiency virus and diabetic medication have also been denied. This topic continues to be fought upon on different levels; for example, Stormans, Inc v Wiesman challenged Washington state regulations on providing all lawfully prescribed pharmaceuticals, including EC. They were challenging Washington state regulations on providing all lawfully prescribed pharmaceuticals. Courts have been warned that if pharmacists are allowed to deny EC prescriptions on religious or moral beliefs, it can affect public health and set a dangerous precedent with respect to \"critical, life-saving preventative care\". The court denied the claim, stating that all pharmacies, even if the owner has a religious objection, must provide all prescribed medication, including EC. The pharmacy in question tried to appeal the case to the Supreme Court, but the appeal was rejected, leaving the lower court's ruling in place. Wal-Mart, the third largest U.S. pharmacy chain, refused to carry EC from 1997 to 2006, which shows that accessibility may still be an issue in areas dependent on single pharmacies with no alternatives.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18940", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18940", "title": "Meat", "text": "Animal flesh eaten as food\nMeat is animal tissue, mostly muscle, that is eaten as food. Humans have hunted and farmed other animals for meat since prehistory. The Neolithic Revolution allowed the domestication of vertebrates, including chickens, sheep, goats, pigs, horses, and cattle, starting around 11,000 years ago. Since then, selective breeding has enabled farmers to produce meat with the qualities desired by producers and consumers. Meat is important to economies and cultures around the world.\nMeat is mainly composed of water, protein, and fat. Its quality is affected by many factors, including the genetics, health, and nutritional status of the animal involved. Without preservation, bacteria and fungi decompose and spoil unprocessed meat within hours or days. Meat is edible raw, but it is mostly eaten cooked, such as by stewing or roasting, or processed, such as by smoking or salting. \nThe consumption of meat (especially red and processed meat, as opposed to fish and poultry) increases the risk of certain negative health outcomes including cancer, coronary heart disease, and diabetes. Meat production significantly harms the environment by contributing to global warming, pollution, and biodiversity loss. Some people (vegetarians and vegans) choose not to eat meat for ethical, environmental, health or religious reasons.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"meat\" comes from the Old English word , meaning food in general. In modern usage, \"meat\" primarily means skeletal muscle with its associated fat and connective tissue, but it can include offal, here meaning other edible organs such as liver and kidney. The term is sometimes used in a more restrictive sense to mean the flesh of mammalian species (pigs, cattle, sheep, goats, etc.) raised and prepared for human consumption, to the exclusion of fish, other seafood, insects, poultry, or other animals.\nHistory.\nDomestication.\nPaleontological evidence suggests that meat constituted a substantial proportion of the diet of the earliest humans. Early hunter-gatherers depended on the organized hunting of large animals such as bison and deer. Animals were domesticated in the Neolithic, enabling the systematic production of meat and the breeding of animals to improve meat production.\nIntensive animal farming.\nIn the postwar period, governments gave farmers guaranteed prices to increase animal production. The effect was to raise output at the cost of increased inputs such as of animal feed and veterinary medicines, as well as of animal disease and environmental pollution. In 1966, the United States, the United Kingdom and other industrialized nations, began factory farming of beef and dairy cattle and domestic pigs. Intensive animal farming became globalized in the later years of the 20th century, replacing traditional stock rearing in countries around the world. In 1990 intensive animal farming accounted for 30% of world meat production and by 2005, this had risen to 40%.\nSelective breeding.\nModern agriculture employs techniques such as progeny testing to speed selective breeding, allowing the rapid acquisition of the qualities desired by meat producers. For instance, in the wake of well-publicized health concerns associated with saturated fats in the 1980s, the fat content of United Kingdom beef, pork and lamb fell from 20\u201326 percent to 4\u20138 percent within a few decades, due to both selective breeding for leanness and changed methods of butchery. Methods of genetic engineering that could improve the meat-producing qualities of animals are becoming available.\nMeat production continues to be shaped by the demands of customers. The trend towards selling meat in pre-packaged cuts has increased the demand for larger breeds of cattle, better suited to producing such cuts. Animals not previously exploited for their meat are now being farmed, including mammals such as antelope, zebra, water buffalo and camel, as well as non-mammals, such as crocodile, emu and ostrich. Organic farming supports an increasing demand for meat produced to that standard.\nAnimal growth and development.\nSeveral factors affect the growth and development of meat.\nGenetics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nSome economically important traits in meat animals are heritable to some degree, and can thus be selected for by animal breeding. In cattle, certain growth features are controlled by recessive genes which have not so far been excluded, complicating breeding. One such trait is dwarfism; another is the doppelender or \"double muscling\" condition, which causes muscle hypertrophy and thereby increases the animal's commercial value. Genetic analysis continues to reveal the mechanisms that control numerous aspects of the endocrine system and, through it, meat growth and quality.\nGenetic engineering can shorten breeding programs significantly because they allow for the identification and isolation of genes coding for desired traits, and for the reincorporation of these genes into the animal genome. To enable this, the genomes of many animals are being mapped. Some research has already seen commercial application. For instance, a recombinant bacterium has been developed which improves the digestion of grass in the rumen of cattle, and some features of muscle fibers have been genetically altered. Experimental reproductive cloning of commercially important meat animals such as sheep, pig or cattle has been successful. Asexual reproduction of animals bearing desirable traits is anticipated.\nEnvironment.\nHeat regulation in livestock is of economic significance, as mammals attempt to maintain a constant optimal body temperature. Low temperatures tend to prolong animal development and high temperatures tend to delay it. Depending on their size, body shape and insulation through tissue and fur, some animals have a relatively narrow zone of temperature tolerance and others (e.g. cattle) a broad one. Static magnetic fields, for reasons still unknown, retard animal development.\nAnimal nutrition.\nThe quality and quantity of usable meat depends on the animal's \"plane of nutrition\", i.e., whether it is over- or underfed. Scientists disagree about how exactly the plane of nutrition influences carcase composition.\nThe composition of the diet, especially the amount of protein provided, is an important factor regulating animal growth. Ruminants, which may digest cellulose, are better adapted to poor-quality diets, but their ruminal microorganisms degrade high-quality protein if supplied in excess. Because producing high-quality protein animal feed is expensive, several techniques are employed or experimented with to ensure maximum utilization of protein. These include the treatment of feed with formalin to protect amino acids during their passage through the rumen, the recycling of manure by feeding it back to cattle mixed with feed concentrates, or the conversion of petroleum hydrocarbons to protein through microbial action.\nIn plant feed, environmental factors influence the availability of crucial nutrients or micronutrients, a lack or excess of which can cause a great many ailments. In Australia, where the soil contains limited phosphate, cattle are fed additional phosphate to increase the efficiency of beef production. Also in Australia, cattle and sheep in certain areas were often found losing their appetite and dying in the midst of rich pasture; this was found to be a result of cobalt deficiency in the soil. Plant toxins are a risk to grazing animals; for instance, sodium fluoroacetate, found in some African and Australian plants, kills by disrupting the cellular metabolism. Some man-made pollutants such as methylmercury and some pesticide residues present a particular hazard as they bioaccumulate in meat, potentially poisoning consumers.\nAnimal welfare.\nPractices such as confinement in factory farming have generated concerns for animal welfare. Animals have abnormal behaviors such as tail-biting, cannibalism, and feather pecking. Invasive procedures such as beak trimming, castration, and ear notching have similarly been questioned. Breeding for high productivity may affect welfare, as when broiler chickens are bred to be very large and to grow rapidly. Broilers often have leg deformities and become lame, and many die from the stress of handling and transport.\nHuman intervention.\nMeat producers may seek to improve the fertility of female animals through the administration of gonadotrophic or ovulation-inducing hormones. In pig production, sow infertility is a common problem \u2013 possibly due to excessive fatness. No methods currently exist to augment the fertility of male animals. Artificial insemination is now routinely used to produce animals of the best possible genetic quality, and the efficiency of this method is improved through the administration of hormones that synchronize the ovulation cycles within groups of females.\nGrowth hormones, particularly anabolic agents such as steroids, are used in some countries to accelerate muscle growth in animals. This practice has given rise to the beef hormone controversy, an international trade dispute. It may decrease the tenderness of meat, although research on this is inconclusive, and have other effects on the composition of the muscle flesh. Where castration is used to improve control over male animals, its side effects can be counteracted by the administration of hormones. Myostatin has been used to produce muscle hypertrophy.\nSedatives may be administered to animals to counteract stress factors and increase weight gain. The feeding of antibiotics to certain animals increases growth rates. This practice is particularly prevalent in the US, but has been banned in the EU, partly because it causes antimicrobial resistance in pathogenic microorganisms.\nComposition.\nBiochemical.\nThe biochemical composition of meat varies in complex ways depending on the species, breed, sex, age, plane of nutrition, training and exercise of the animal, as well as on the anatomical location of the musculature involved. Even between animals of the same litter and sex there are considerable differences in such parameters as the percentage of intramuscular fat.\nAdult mammalian muscle consists of roughly 75 percent water, 19 percent protein, 2.5 percent intramuscular fat, 1.2 percent carbohydrates and 2.3 percent other soluble substances. These include organic compounds, especially amino acids, and inorganic substances such as minerals. Muscle proteins are either soluble in water (sarcoplasmic proteins, about 11.5 percent of total muscle mass) or in concentrated salt solutions (myofibrillar proteins, about 5.5 percent of mass). There are several hundred sarcoplasmic proteins. Most of them \u2013 the glycolytic enzymes \u2013 are involved in glycolysis, the conversion of sugars into high-energy molecules, especially adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The two most abundant myofibrillar proteins, myosin and actin, form the muscle's overall structure and enable it to deliver power, consuming ATP in the process. The remaining protein mass includes connective tissue (collagen and elastin). Fat in meat can be either adipose tissue, used by the animal to store energy and consisting of \"true fats\" (esters of glycerol with fatty acids), or intramuscular fat, which contains phospholipids and cholesterol.\nNutritional.\nMuscle tissue is high in protein, containing all of the essential amino acids, and in most cases is a good source of zinc, vitamin B12, selenium, phosphorus, niacin, vitamin B6, choline, riboflavin and iron. Several forms of meat are high in vitamin K. Muscle tissue is very low in carbohydrates and does not contain dietary fiber.\nThe fat content of meat varies widely with the species and breed of animal, the way in which the animal was raised, what it was fed, the part of the body, and the methods of butchering and cooking. Wild animals such as deer are leaner than farm animals, leading those concerned about fat content to choose game such as venison. Decades of breeding meat animals for fatness is being reversed by consumer demand for leaner meat. Small amounts \u2013 in the range \u2013 of fat deposited near the muscle fibers (\"marbling\") in meats can slightly improve perceived flavour, juiciness and tenderness, but contribute no more than about to overall palatability. Fat around meat further contains cholesterol. The increase in meat consumption after 1960 is associated with significant imbalances of fat and cholesterol in the human diet.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nUpon reaching a predetermined age or weight, livestock are usually transported \"en masse\" to the slaughterhouse. Depending on its length and circumstances, this may exert stress and injuries on the animals, and some may die \"en route\". Unnecessary stress in transport may adversely affect the quality of the meat. In particular, the muscles of stressed animals are low in water and glycogen, and their pH fails to attain acidic values, all of which results in poor meat quality.\nSlaughter.\nAnimals are usually slaughtered by being first stunned and then exsanguinated (bled out). Death results from the one or the other procedure, depending on the methods employed. Stunning can be effected through asphyxiating the animals with carbon dioxide, shooting them with a gun or a captive bolt pistol, or shocking them with electric current. The exsanguination is accomplished by severing the carotid artery and the jugular vein in cattle and sheep, and the anterior vena cava in pigs. Draining as much blood as possible from the carcass is necessary because blood causes the meat to have an unappealing appearance and is a breeding ground for microorganisms.\nDressing and cutting.\nAfter exsanguination, the carcass is dressed; that is, the head, feet, hide (except hogs and some veal), excess fat, viscera and offal are removed, leaving only bones and edible muscle. Cattle and pig carcases, but not those of sheep, are then split in half along the mid ventral axis, and the carcase is cut into wholesale pieces. The dressing and cutting sequence, long a province of manual labor, is being progressively automated.\nConditioning.\nUnder hygienic conditions and without other treatment, meat can be stored at above its freezing point (\u22121.5\u00a0\u00b0C) for about six weeks without spoilage, during which time it undergoes an aging process that increases its tenderness and flavor. During the first day after death, glycolysis continues until the accumulation of lactic acid causes the pH to reach about 5.5. The remaining glycogen, about 18\u00a0g per kg, increases the water-holding capacity and tenderness of cooked meat.\n\"Rigor mortis\" sets in a few hours after death as adenosine triphosphate is used up. This causes the muscle proteins actin and myosin to combine into rigid actomyosin. This in turn lowers the meat's water-holding capacity, so the meat loses water or \"weeps\". In muscles that enter \"rigor\" in a contracted position, actin and myosin filaments overlap and cross-bond, resulting in meat that becomes tough when cooked. Over time, muscle proteins denature in varying degree, with the exception of the collagen and elastin of connective tissue, and \"rigor mortis\" resolves. These changes mean that meat is tender and pliable when cooked just after death or after the resolution of \"rigor\", but tough when cooked during \"rigor.\"\nAs the muscle pigment myoglobin denatures, its iron oxidizes, which may cause a brown discoloration near the surface of the meat. Ongoing proteolysis contributes to conditioning: hypoxanthine, a breakdown product of ATP, contributes to meat's flavor and odor, as do other products of the decomposition of muscle fat and protein.\nAdditives.\nWhen meat is industrially processed, additives are used to protect or modify its flavor or color, to improve its tenderness, juiciness or cohesiveness, or to aid with its preservation.\nConsumption.\nHistorical.\nA bioarchaeological (specifically, isotopic analysis) study of early medieval England found, based on the funerary record, that high-meat protein diets were extremely rare, and that (contrary to previously held assumptions) elites did not consume more meat than non-elites, and men did not consume more meat than women.\nIn the nineteenth century, meat consumption in Britain was the highest in Europe, exceeded only by that in British colonies. In the 1830s consumption per head in Britain was about a year, rising to in 1912. In 1904, laborers consumed a year while aristocrats ate . There were some 43,000 butcher's shops in Britain in 1910, with \"possibly more money invested in the meat industry than in any other British business\" except finance. The US was a meat importing country by 1926.\nTruncated lifespan as a result of intensive breeding allows more meat to be produced from fewer animals. The world cattle population was about 600 million in 1929, with 700\u00a0million sheep and goats and 300\u00a0million pigs. \nTrends.\nAccording to the Food and Agriculture Organization, the overall consumption for white meat has increased from the 20th to the 21st centuries. Poultry meat has increased by 76.6% per kilo per capita and pig meat by 19.7%. Bovine meat has decreased from per capita in 1990 to per capita in 2009. FAO analysis found that 357 million tonnes of meat were produced in 2021, 53% more than in 2000, with chicken meat representing more than half the increase.\nOverall, diets that include meat are the most common worldwide according to the results of a 2018 Ipsos MORI study of 16\u201364 years olds in 28 countries. Ipsos states \"An omnivorous diet is the most common diet globally, with non-meat diets (which can include fish) followed by over a tenth of the global population.\" Approximately 87% of people include meat in their diet in some frequency. 73% of meat eaters included it in their diet regularly and 14% consumed meat only occasionally or infrequently.\nThe type of meat consumed varies between different cultures. The amount and kind of meat consumed varies by income, both between countries and within a given country. Horses are commonly eaten in countries such as France, Italy, Germany and Japan. Horses and other large mammals such as reindeer were hunted during the late Paleolithic in western Europe. Dogs are consumed in China, South Korea and Vietnam. Dogs are occasionally eaten in the Arctic regions. Historically, dog meat has been consumed in various parts of the world, such as Hawaii, Japan, Switzerland and Mexico. Cats are sometimes eaten, such as in Peru. Guinea pigs are raised for their flesh in the Andes. Whales and dolphins are hunted, partly for their flesh, in several countries. Misidentification sometimes occurs; in 2013, products in Europe labelled as beef actually contained horse meat.\nMethods of preparation.\nMeat can be cooked in many ways, including braising, broiling, frying, grilling, and roasting. Meat can be cured by smoking, which preserves and flavors food by exposing it to smoke from burning or smoldering wood. Other methods of curing include pickling, salting, and air-drying. Some recipes call for raw meat; steak tartare is made from minced raw beef. P\u00e2t\u00e9s are made with ground meat and fat, often including liver.\nRed vs white meat.\nIn the context of nutrition, \"red meat\" is defined as meat obtained from mammals, including beef, pork, lamb, mutton, veal, venison, and goat. Red meat does not necessarily appear red in color. Studies on the long-term health effects of meat often use the term \"white meat\" for poultry, including chicken and turkey. Some sources use the term \"white meat\" for both poultry and fish, and others exclude fish.\nIn culinary contexts, the term \"white meat\" is often used more narrowly to refer to only certain cuts of poultry, particularly the breast and wings. Chicken legs and thighs are referred to as \"dark meat\" in these contexts.\nHealth effects.\nMeat, in particular red and processed meat, is linked to a variety of health risks. The \"2015\u20132020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans\" asked men and teenage boys to increase their consumption of vegetables or other underconsumed foods (fruits, whole grains, and dairy) while reducing intake of protein foods (meats, poultry, and eggs) that they currently overconsume.\nContamination.\nToxic compounds including heavy metals, mycotoxins, pesticide residues, dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyl can contaminate meat. Processed, smoked and cooked meat may contain carcinogens such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Toxins may be introduced to meat as part of animal feed, as veterinary drug residues, or during processing and cooking. Such compounds are often metabolized in the body to form harmful by-products. Negative effects depend on the individual genome, diet, and history of the consumer.\nCancer.\nThe consumption of processed and red meat carries an increased risk of cancer. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), a specialized agency of the World Health Organization (WHO), classified processed meat (e.g., bacon, ham, hot dogs, sausages) as, \"carcinogenic to humans (Group 1), based on sufficient evidence in humans that the consumption of processed meat causes colorectal cancer.\" IARC classified red meat as \"probably carcinogenic to humans (Group 2A), based on limited evidence that the consumption of red meat causes cancer in humans and strong mechanistic evidence supporting a carcinogenic effect.\"\nCancer Research UK, National Health Service (NHS) and the National Cancer Institute have stated that red and processed meat intake increases risk of bowel cancer. The American Cancer Society in their \"Diet and Physical Activity Guideline\", stated \"evidence that red and processed meats increase cancer risk has existed for decades, and many health organizations recommend limiting or avoiding these foods.\" The Canadian Cancer Society have stated that \"eating red and processed meat increases cancer risk\".\nA 2021 review found an increase of 11\u201351% risk of multiple cancer per 100g/d increment of red meat, and an increase of 8\u201372% risk of multiple cancer per 50g/d increment of processed meat.\nHighly carcinogenic nitrosamines are commonly found in processed meat products. Nitrosamines are also formed in the gut when heme iron is consumed; red meat is rich in heme iron. Heterocyclic amines (HCAs) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are chemicals formed when muscle meat, including beef, pork, fish, or poultry, is cooked using high-temperature methods, such as pan frying or grilling directly over an open flame. In laboratory experiments, HCAs and PAHs have been found to be mutagenic\u2014that is, they cause changes in DNA that may increase the risk of cancer. Microwaving meat before finishing cooking may reduce HCAs significantly.\nBacterial contamination.\nBacterial contamination has been seen with meat products. A 2011 study by the Translational Genomics Research Institute showed that nearly half (47%) of the meat and poultry in U.S. grocery stores were contaminated with \"S. aureus\", with more than half (52%) of those bacteria resistant to antibiotics. A 2018 investigation by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism and \"The Guardian\" found that around 15 percent of the US population suffers from foodborne illnesses every year. The investigation highlighted unsanitary conditions in US-based meat plants, which included meat products covered in excrement and abscesses \"filled with pus\".\nComplete cooking and the careful avoidance of recontamination reduce the risk of bacterial infections from meat.\nDiabetes.\nA 2022 umbrella review found that each 100 g of red meat consumed per day is associated with a 17% higher risk of type 2 diabetes. Each 50 g of processed meat is associated with a 37% higher risk of type 2 diabetes.\nDiabetes UK advises people to limit their intake of red and processed meat.\nInfectious diseases.\nMeat production and trade substantially increase risks for infectious diseases (zoonosis), including of pandemics, whether though contact with wild and farmed animals, or via husbandry's environmental impact.&lt;ref name=\"10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109341\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; For example, avian influenza from poultry meat production is a threat to human health. Furthermore, the use of antibiotics in meat production contributes to antimicrobial resistance \u2013 which contributes to millions of deaths \u2013 and makes it harder to control infectious diseases.\nChanges in consumer behavior.\nIn response to changing meat prices as well as health concerns about saturated fat and cholesterol, consumers have altered their consumption of various meats. Consumption of beef in the United States between 1970 and 1974 and 1990\u20131994 dropped by 21%, while consumption of chicken increased by 90%.\nCardiovascular disease.\nA 2022 umbrella review found that each 100 g of red meat consumed per day is associated with a15 % higher risk of coronary heart disease, 14 % higher risk of hypertension, and 12% higher risk of stroke. Each 50 g of processed meat consumed per day is associated with a 27% higher risk of coronary heart disease, 17% higher risk of stroke, 8% higher risk of heart failure, and 15% higher risk of all-cause mortality.\nEnvironmental impact.\nA multitude of serious negative environmental effects are associated with meat production. Among these are greenhouse gas emissions, fossil energy use, water use, water quality changes, and effects on grazed ecosystems. They are so significant that according to University of Oxford researchers, \"a vegan diet is probably the single biggest way to reduce your impact on planet Earth... far bigger than cutting down on your flights or buying an electric car\". However, this is often ignored in the public consciousness and in plans to tackle serious environmental issues such as the climate crisis.\nThe livestock sector may be the largest source of water pollution (due to animal wastes, fertilizers, pesticides), and it contributes to emergence of antibiotic resistance. It accounts for over 8% of global human water use. It is a significant driver of biodiversity loss and ecosystems, as it causes deforestation, ocean dead zones, species extinction, land degradation, pollution, overfishing and global warming.&lt;ref name=\"10.1038/s43016-021-00358-x\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Cattle farming was estimated to be responsible for 80 per cent of Amazon deforestation in 2008 due to the clearing of forests to grow animal feed (especially soya) and cattle ranching.\nEnvironmental effects vary among livestock production systems. Grazing of livestock can be beneficial for some wildlife species, but not for others. Targeted grazing of livestock is used as a food-producing alternative to herbicide use in some vegetation management.\nLand use.\nMeat production is by far the biggest user of land, as it accounts for nearly 40% of the global land surface. Just in the contiguous United States, 34% of its land area () are used as pasture and rangeland, mostly feeding livestock, not counting of cropland (20%), some of which is used for producing feed for livestock. Roughly 75% of deforested land around the globe is used for livestock pasture. Deforestation from practices like slash-and-burn releases CO2 and removes the carbon sink of grown tropical forest ecosystems which substantially mitigate climate change. Land use is a major pressure on pressure on fertile soils which is important for global food security.\nClimate change.\nThe rising global consumption of carbon-intensive meat products has \"exploded the global carbon footprint of agriculture,\" according to some top scientists. Meat, dairy, and egg production are responsible for 57% of the greenhouse gases attributable to food production, and 20% of all greenhouse gas emissions.\nSome nations show very different impacts to counterparts within the same group, with Brazil and Australia having emissions over 200% higher than the average of their respective income groups, driven by meat consumption.\nAccording to the \"Assessing the Environmental Impacts of Consumption and Production\" report produced by United Nations Environment Programme's (UNEP) international panel for sustainable resource management, a worldwide transition in the direction of a meat and dairy free diet is indispensable if adverse global climate change were to be prevented. A 2019 report in \"The Lancet\" recommended that global meat (and sugar) consumption be reduced by 50 percent to mitigate climate change. Meat consumption in Western societies needs to be reduced by up to 90% according to a 2018 study published in \"Nature\". The 2019 special report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change called for significantly reducing meat consumption, particularly in wealthy countries, in order to mitigate and adapt to climate change.&lt;ref name=\"10.1038/d41586-019-02409-7\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nBiodiversity loss.\nMeat consumption is a primary contributor to the sixth mass extinction. A 2017 study by the World Wildlife Fund found that 60% of global biodiversity loss is attributable to meat-based diets, in particular from the use of land for feed crops, resulting in large-scale loss of habitats and species. Livestock make up 60% of the biomass of all mammals on earth, followed by humans (36%) and wild mammals (4%). In November 2017, 15,364 world scientists signed a Warning to Humanity calling for a drastic reduction in per capita consumption of meat and \"dietary shifts towards mostly plant-based foods\". The 2019 \"Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services\" recommended a reduction in meat consumption to mitigate biodiversity loss. A 2021 Chatham House report asserted that a shift towards plant-based diets would free up land for the restoration of ecosystems and biodiversity.\nMeat consumption is predicted to rise as the human population increases and becomes more affluent; this in turn would increase greenhouse gas emissions and further reduce biodiversity.\nReducing environmental impact.\nThe environmental impact of meat production can be reduced on the farm by conversion of human-inedible residues of food crops. Manure from meat-producing livestock is used as fertilizer. Substitution of animal manures for synthetic fertilizers in crop production can be environmentally significant, as between 43 and 88 MJ of fossil fuel energy are used per kg of nitrogen in manufacture of synthetic nitrogenous fertilizers.\nReducing meat consumption.\nThe IPCC and others have stated that meat production has to be reduced substantially for any sufficient mitigation of climate change and, at least initially, largely through shifts towards plant-based diets where meat consumption is high.&lt;ref name=\"10.1038/s43016-021-00431-5\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Meat can be replaced by, for example, high-protein iron-rich low-emission legumes and common fungi, dietary supplements (e.g. of vitamin B12) and fortified foods, cultured meat, microbial foods, mycoprotein, meat substitutes, and other alternatives, such as those based on mushrooms, legumes (pulses), and other food sources.&lt;ref name=\"10.1016/j.appet.2020.105058\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Land previously used for meat production can be rewilded. The biologists Rodolfo Dirzo, Gerardo Ceballos, and Paul R. Ehrlich state that it is the \"massive planetary monopoly of industrial meat production that needs to be curbed\" while respecting the cultural traditions of indigenous peoples, for whom meat is an important source of protein.\nCultural aspects.\nMeat is part of the human diet in most cultures, where it often has symbolic meaning and important social functions. Some people choose not to eat meat (vegetarianism) or any food made from animals (veganism). The reasons for not eating all or some meat may include ethical objections to killing animals for food, health concerns, environmental concerns or religious dietary laws.\nEthical issues.\nEthical issues regarding the consumption of meat include objecting to the act of killing animals or to the agricultural practices used in meat production. Reasons for objecting to killing animals for consumption may include animal rights, environmental ethics, or an aversion to inflicting pain or harm on sentient animals. Some people, while not vegetarians, refuse to eat the flesh of certain animals for cultural or religious reasons.\nThe founders of Western philosophy disagreed about the ethics of eating meat. Plato's \"Republic\" has Socrates describe the ideal state as vegetarian. Pythagoras believed that humans and animals were equal and therefore disapproved of meat consumption, as did Plutarch, whereas Zeno and Epicurus were vegetarian but allowed meat-eating in their philosophy. Conversely, Aristotle's \"Politics\" assert that animals, as inferior beings, exist to serve humans, including as food. Augustine drew on Aristotle to argue that the universe's natural hierarchy allows humans to eat animals, and animals to eat plants. Enlightenment philosophers were likewise divided. Descartes wrote that animals were merely animated machines, while Kant considered them inferior beings for lack of discernment: means rather than ends. But Voltaire and Rousseau disagreed; Rousseau argued that meat-eating is a social rather than a natural act, because children are not interested in meat.\nLater philosophers examined the changing practices of eating meat in the modern age as part of a process of detachment from animals as living beings. Norbert Elias, for instance, noted that in medieval times cooked animals were brought to the table whole, but that since the Renaissance only the edible parts are served, which are no longer recognizably part of an animal. Modern eaters, according to , demand an \"ellipsis\" between meat and dead animals. Fernand Braudel wrote that since the European diet of the 15th and 16th century was particularly heavy in meat, European colonialism helped export meat-eating across the globe, as colonized peoples took up the culinary habits of their colonizers.\nReligious traditions.\nAmong the Indian religions, Jainism opposes the eating of meat, while some schools of Buddhism and Hinduism advocate but do not mandate vegetarianism. Some Sikh groups oppose eating any meat. Jewish \"Kashrut\" dietary rules allow certain (\"kosher\") meat and forbid other (\"treif\") meat. Similar rules apply in Islamic dietary laws: The Quran explicitly forbids meat from animals that die naturally, blood, and the meat of pigs, which are \"haram\", forbidden, as opposed to \"halal\", allowed.\nPsychology.\nResearch in applied psychology has investigated meat eating in relation to morality, emotions, cognition, and personality. Psychological research suggests meat eating is correlated with masculinity, and reduced openness to experience. Research into the consumer psychology of meat is relevant both to meat industry marketing and to those advocating eating less meat.\nGender.\nUnlike most other foods, meat is not perceived as gender-neutral; it is associated with men and masculinity. Sociological research, ranging from African tribal societies to contemporary barbecue, indicates that men are much more likely to participate in preparing meat than other food. This has been attributed to the influence of traditional male gender roles, in view of what Jack Goody calls a \"male familiarity with killing\", or as Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss suggests, that roasting (meat) is more violent than boiling (grains and vegetables). In modern societies, men tend to consume more meat than women, and men often prefer red meat whereas women tend to prefer chicken and fish.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 (https://). Text taken from https://, FAO, FAO. "}
{"id": "18942", "revid": "32230461", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18942", "title": "Monty Python", "text": "British surreal comedy group\nMonty Python, also known as the Pythons, were a British comedy troupe formed in 1969 consisting of Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle, Terry Jones and Michael Palin. The group initially came to prominence in the UK for the sketch comedy television series \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", which aired on the BBC from 1969 to 1974. Their work then developed into a larger collection that included live shows, films, albums, books, and musicals; their influence on comedy has been compared to the Beatles' influence on music. Their sketch show has been called \"an important moment in the evolution of television comedy\".\n\"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" was loosely structured as a sketch show, but its innovative stream of consciousness approach and Gilliam's animation skills pushed the boundaries of what was acceptable in style and content. A self-contained comedy unit, the Pythons had creative control that allowed them to experiment with form and content, discarding rules of television comedy. They followed their television work by making the films \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" (1975), \"Life of Brian\" (1979), and \"The Meaning of Life\" (1983). Their influence on British comedy has been apparent for years, while it has coloured the work of the early editions of \"Saturday Night Live\" through to absurdist trends in television comedy.\nAt the 41st British Academy Film Awards in 1988, Monty Python received the BAFTA Award for Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema. In 1998, they were awarded the AFI Star Award by the American Film Institute. \"Holy Grail\" and \"Life of Brian\" are frequently ranked on lists of the greatest comedy films. A 2005 poll asked more than 300 comedians, comedy writers, producers, and directors to name the greatest comedians of all time, and half of Monty Python's members made the top 50.\nHistory.\nBefore \"Flying Circus\".\nJones and Palin met at Oxford University, where they performed together with the Oxford Revue. Chapman and Cleese met at Cambridge University. Idle was also at Cambridge, but started a year after Chapman and Cleese. Cleese met Gilliam in New York City while on tour with the Cambridge University Footlights revue \"Cambridge Circus\" (originally entitled \"A Clump of Plinths\"). Chapman, Cleese, and Idle were members of the Footlights, which at that time also included the future Goodies (Tim Brooke-Taylor, Bill Oddie, and Graeme Garden), and Jonathan Lynn (co-writer of \"Yes Minister\" and \"Yes, Prime Minister\"). During Idle's presidency of the club, feminist writer Germaine Greer and broadcaster Clive James were members. Recordings of Footlights' revues (called \"Smokers\") at Pembroke College include sketches and performances by Cleese and Idle, which, along with tapes of Idle's performances in some of the drama society's theatrical productions, are kept in the archives of the Pembroke Players.\nThe six Python members appeared in or wrote these shows before \"Flying Circus\":\nThe BBC's satirical television show \"The Frost Report\", broadcast from March 1966 to December 1967, is credited as first uniting the British Pythons and providing an environment in which they could develop their particular styles.\nFollowing the success of \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\" (which was broadcast on ITV from December 1967 to May 1969), Thames Television offered Gilliam, Idle, Jones, and Palin their own late-night adult comedy series together. At the same time, Chapman and Cleese were offered a show by the BBC, which had been impressed by their work on \"The Frost Report\" and \"At Last the 1948 Show\". Cleese was reluctant to do a two-man show for various reasons, including Chapman's supposedly difficult and erratic personality. Cleese had fond memories of working with Palin on \"How to Irritate People\" and invited him to join the team. With no studio available at Thames until summer 1970 for the late-night show, Palin agreed to join Cleese and Chapman, and suggested the involvement of his writing partner Jones and colleague Idle\u2014who in turn wanted Gilliam to provide animations for the projected series. Much has been made of the fact that the Monty Python troupe is the result of Cleese's desire to work with Palin and the chance circumstances that brought the other four members into the fold.\nBy contrast, according to John Cleese's autobiography, the origins of \"Monty Python\" lay in the admiration that writing partners Cleese and Chapman had for the new type of comedy being done on \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\"; as a result, a meeting was initiated by Cleese between Chapman, Idle, Jones, Palin, and himself at which it was agreed to pool their writing and performing efforts and jointly seek production sponsorship. According to their official website, the group was born from a Kashmir tandoori restaurant in Hampstead on 11 May 1969, following a taping of \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\" which Cleese and Chapman attended. It was the first time all six got together, with their first meetings then taking place at Cleese's apartment in Basil Street, Knightsbridge in central London.\n\"Monty Python's Flying Circus\".\nDevelopment of the series.\nAccording to show director Ian MacNaughton, the first discussion over the idea for the show \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" was a result of BBC's comedy advisor, Barry Took, bringing the Pythons along with John Howard Davies (director of the first four episodes) and MacNaughton together into one conference room at the BBC Television Centre. The Pythons had a definite idea about what they wanted to do with the series. They were admirers of the work of Peter Cook, Alan Bennett, Jonathan Miller, and Dudley Moore on \"Beyond the Fringe\"\u2014seminal to the British \"satire boom\"\u2014and had worked on \"Frost\", which was similar in style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The 1960s satire boom opened up the way for a fresh, inventive generation of young comedy writer-performers to flourish on TV and to take comedy in a new and exciting direction.\"\n\u2014BBC profile for \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\".\nThey enjoyed Cook and Moore's sketch show \"Not Only... But Also\". One problem the Pythons perceived with these programmes was that though the body of the sketch would be strong, the writers would often struggle to then find a punchline funny enough to end on, and this would detract from the overall sketch quality. They decided that they would simply not bother to \"cap\" their sketches in the traditional manner, and early episodes of the \"Flying Circus\" series make great play of this abandonment of the punchline (one scene has Cleese turn to Idle, as the sketch descends into chaos, and remark that \"This is the silliest sketch I've ever been in\"\u2014they all resolve not to carry on and simply walk off the set). However, as they began assembling material for the show, the Pythons watched one of their collective heroes, Spike Milligan, whom they had admired on \"The Goon Show\" (a show the Pythons regard as their biggest influence, which also featured Peter Sellers, whom Cleese called \"the greatest voice man of all time\") recording his groundbreaking BBC series \"Q...\" (1969). Not only was \"Q...\" more irreverent and anarchic than any previous television comedy, but Milligan also would often \"give up\" on sketches halfway through and wander off set (often muttering \"Did I write this?\"). It was clear that their new series would now seem less original, and Jones in particular became determined the Pythons should innovate. Michael Palin recalls \"Terry Jones and I adored the \"Q...\" shows...[Milligan] was the first writer to play with the conventions of television.\" Charles Isherwood writes that the Pythons \"derived their sketch formats in part from the rowdy tradition of the music hall.\"\nAfter much debate, Jones remembered an animation Gilliam had created for \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\" called \"Beware of the Elephants\", which had intrigued him with its stream-of-consciousness style. Jones felt it would be a good concept to apply to the series: allowing sketches to blend into one another. Palin had been equally fascinated by another of Gilliam's efforts, entitled \"Christmas Cards\", and agreed that it represented \"a way of doing things differently\". Since Cleese, Chapman, and Idle were less concerned with the overall flow of the programme, Jones, Palin, and Gilliam became largely responsible for the presentation style of the \"Flying Circus\" series, in which disparate sketches are linked to give each episode the appearance of a single stream-of-consciousness (often using a Gilliam animation to move from the closing image of one sketch to the opening scene of another). The BBC states, \"Gilliam's unique animation style became crucial, segueing seamlessly between any two completely unrelated ideas and making the stream-of-consciousness work.\"\nWriting started at 9:00a.m. and finished at 5:00p.m. Typically, Cleese and Chapman worked as one pair isolated from the others, as did Jones and Palin, while Idle wrote alone. After a few days, they would join with Gilliam, critique their scripts, and exchange ideas. Their approach to writing was democratic. If the majority found an idea humorous, it was included in the show. The casting of roles for the sketches was a similarly unselfish process, since each member viewed himself primarily as a \"writer\", rather than an actor eager for screen time. When the themes for sketches were chosen, Gilliam had a free hand in bridging them with animations, using a camera, scissors, and airbrush.\nWhile the show was a collaborative process, different factions within Python were responsible for elements of the team's humour. In general, the work of the Oxford-educated members (Jones and Palin) was more visual, and more fanciful conceptually (e.g., the arrival of the Spanish Inquisition in a suburban front room), while the Cambridge graduates' sketches tended to be more verbal and more aggressive (for example, Cleese and Chapman's many \"confrontation\" sketches, where one character intimidates or hurls abuse, or Idle's characters with bizarre verbal quirks, such as \"The Man Who Speaks In Anagrams\"). Cleese confirmed that \"most of the sketches with heavy abuse were Graham's and mine, anything that started with a slow pan across countryside and impressive music was Mike and Terry's, and anything that got utterly involved with words and disappeared up any personal orifice was Eric's\". Gilliam's animations ranged from the whimsical to the savage (the cartoon format allowing him to create some astonishingly violent scenes without fear of censorship).\nSeveral names for the show were considered before \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" was settled upon. Some were \"Owl Stretching Time\", \"The Toad Elevating Moment\", \"A Horse, a Spoon and a Basin\", \"Vaseline Review\", and \"Bun, Wackett, Buzzard, Stubble and Boot\". Reportedly, these names were considered for the show because the group members found it funny that the show name would have nothing to do with the actual content of the series. \"Flying Circus\" stuck when the BBC explained it had printed that name in its schedules and was not prepared to amend it. \"Gwen Dibley's Flying Circus\" was named after a woman Palin had read about in the newspaper, thinking it would be amusing if she were to discover she had her own TV show. \"Baron Von Took's Flying Circus\" was considered as an affectionate tribute to Barry Took, the man who had brought them together. \"Arthur Megapode's Flying Circus\" was suggested, then discarded. The name \"Baron Von Took's Flying Circus\" had the form of \"Baron Manfred von Richthofen's Flying Circus\" of WWI fame, and the new group was forming in a time when the Royal Guardsmen's 1966 song \"Snoopy vs. the Red Baron\" had peaked. The term 'flying circus' was also another name for the popular entertainment of the 1920s known as barnstorming, where multiple performers collaborated with their stunts to perform a combined set of acts.\nDiffering, somewhat confusing accounts are given of the origins of the Python name, although the members agree that its only \"significance\" was that they thought it sounded funny. In the 1998 documentary \"Live at Aspen\" during the US Comedy Arts Festival, where the troupe was awarded the AFI Star Award by the American Film Institute, the group implied that \"Monty\" was selected (Eric Idle's idea) as a gently mocking tribute to Field Marshal Lord Montgomery, a British general of World War II; requiring a \"slippery-sounding\" surname, they settled on \"Python\". On other occasions, Idle has claimed that the name \"Monty\" was that of a popular and rotund fellow who drank in his local pub; people would often walk in and ask the barman, \"Has Monty been in yet?\", forcing the name to become stuck in his mind. The name Monty Python was later described by the BBC as being \"envisaged by the team as the perfect name for a sleazy entertainment agent\".\nStyle of the show.\n\"Flying Circus\" popularised innovative formal techniques, such as the cold open, in which an episode began without the traditional opening titles or announcements. An example of this is the \"It's\" man: Palin, outfitted in Robinson Crusoe garb, making a tortuous journey across various terrains, before finally approaching the camera to state, \"It's\u00a0...\", to be then interrupted by the title sequence and theme music. On several occasions, the cold open lasted until mid-show, after which the regular opening titles ran. Occasionally, the Pythons tricked viewers by rolling the closing credits halfway through the show, usually continuing the joke by fading to the familiar globe logo used for BBC continuity, over which Cleese would parody the clipped tones of a BBC announcer. On one occasion, the credits ran directly after the opening titles. On the subversive nature of the show (and their subsequent films), Cleese states \"anti-authoritarianism was deeply ingrained in Python\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Our first rule was: no punchlines. [Some sketches] start brilliant, great acting, really funny sketch, but the punchline is just not as good as the rest of the sketch, so it kills the entire thing. That's why we eliminated them.\"\n\u2014Terry Gilliam in 2007.\nBecause of their dislike of finishing with punchlines, they experimented with ending the sketches by cutting abruptly to another scene or animation, walking offstage, addressing the camera (breaking the fourth wall), or introducing a totally unrelated event or character. A classic example of this approach was the use of Chapman's \"anti-silliness\" character of \"the Colonel\", who walked into several sketches and ordered them to be stopped because things were becoming \"far too silly\".\nAnother favourite way of ending sketches was to drop a cartoonish \"16-ton weight\" prop on one of the characters when the sketch seemed to be losing momentum, or a knight in full armour (played by Terry Gilliam) would wander on-set and hit characters over the head with a rubber chicken, before cutting to the next scene. Yet another way of changing scenes was when John Cleese, usually outfitted in a dinner suit, would come in as a radio commentator and, in a rather pompous manner, make the formal and determined announcement \"And now for something completely different.\", which later became the title of the first Monty Python film.\nThe Python theme music is the Band of the Grenadier Guards' rendition of John Philip Sousa's \"The Liberty Bell\" which was first published in 1893. Under the Berne Convention's \"country of origin\" concept, the composition was subject to United States copyright law which states that any work first published prior to 1924 was in the public domain, owing to copyright expiration. This enabled Gilliam to co-opt the march for the series without having to make any royalty payments.\nThe use of Gilliam's surreal, collage stop motion animations was another innovative intertextual element of the Python style. Many of the images Gilliam used were lifted from famous works of art, and from Victorian illustrations and engravings. The giant foot that crushes the show's title at the end of the opening credits is the foot of Cupid, cut from a reproduction of the Renaissance masterpiece \"Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time\" by Bronzino. This foot, and Gilliam's style in general, are visual trademarks of the programme.\nThe Pythons used the British tradition of cross-dressing comedy by donning frocks and makeup and playing female roles themselves while speaking in falsetto. Jones specialised in playing the working-class housewife, or \"ratbag old women\" as termed by the BBC. Palin and Idle generally played the role more posh, with Idle playing more feminine women. Cleese played female roles more sparsely, while Chapman was frequently paired with Jones as a ratbag woman or with Idle portraying middle-class women commenting upon TV. Generally speaking, female roles were played by women only when the scene specifically required that the character be sexually attractive (although sometimes they used Idle for this). The troupe later turned to Carol Cleveland\u2014often described as the unofficial seventh member\u2014who co-starred in numerous episodes after 1970. In some episodes, and later in the stoning scene in \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\", they took the idea one step further by playing women who impersonated men.\nMany sketches are well-known and widely quoted. \"Dead Parrot sketch\", \"The Lumberjack Song\", \"Spam\" (which led to the coining of the term email spam), \"Nudge Nudge\", \"The Spanish Inquisition\", \"Upper Class Twit of the Year\", \"Cheese Shop\", \"The Ministry of Silly Walks\", \"Argument Clinic\", \"The Funniest Joke in the World\" (a sketch referenced in Google Translate), and \"Four Yorkshiremen\" are just a few examples. Most of the show's sketches satirise areas of public life, such as: Dead Parrot (poor customer service), Silly Walks (bureaucratic inefficiency), Spam (ubiquity of Spam post World War II), and Four Yorkshiremen (nostalgic conversations). Featuring regularly in skits, Gumbys (characters of limited intelligence and vocabulary) were part of the Pythons' satirical view of television of the 1970s which condescendingly encouraged more involvement from the \"man on the street\".\nIntroduction to North America and the world.\nThe Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) added \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" to its national September 1970 fall line-up. They aired the 13 episodes of series 1, which had first run on the BBC the previous autumn (October 1969 to January 1970), as well as the first six episodes of series 2 only a few weeks after they first appeared on the BBC (September to November 1970). The CBC dropped the show when it returned to regular programming after the Christmas 1970 break, choosing to not place the remaining seven episodes of series 2 on the January 1971 CBC schedule. Within a week, the CBC received hundreds of calls complaining of the cancellation, and more than 100 people staged a demonstration at the CBC's Montreal studios. The show eventually returned, becoming a fixture on the network during the first half of the 1970s.\nSketches from \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" were introduced to American audiences in August 1972, with the release of the Python film \"And Now for Something Completely Different\", featuring sketches from series 1 and 2 of the television show. This 1972 release met with limited box office success.\nThe ability to show \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" under the American NTSC standard had been made possible by the commercial actions of American television producer Greg Garrison. Garrison produced the NBC series \"The Dean Martin Comedy World\", which ran during the summer of 1974. The concept was to show clips from comedy shows produced in other countries, including tape of the Python sketches \"Bicycle Repairman\" and \"The Dull Life of a Stockbroker\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"When [Monty Python] hit the airwaves, it really was quite shocking but it was shocking in a good way. It set you up right and opened up a whole new form of comedy. 'Pythonesque.\"\n\u2014 Ron Devillier, PBS programming director.\nThrough the efforts of Python's American manager Nancy Lewis, during the summer of 1974, Ron Devillier, the programming director for nonprofit PBS television station KERA in Dallas, Texas, started airing episodes of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\". Ratings shot through the roof, prompting other PBS affiliates to pick up the show. Devillier states, \"We got the Nielsens in and started looking at the Saturday ratings. The first night, it was a 6 rating. We couldn't believe it. We didn't know what a 6 looked like. The next week, it was a 7 and it may have taken a month but it stayed there and we started getting 8s, 9s and 10s.\" There was also cross-promotion from FM radio stations across the US, whose airing of tracks from the Python LPs had already introduced American audiences to this bizarre brand of comedy. The popularity on PBS resulted in the 1974 re-release of the 1972 \"...Completely Different\" film, with much greater box office success. The success of the show was captured by a March 1975 article headline in \"The New York Times\", \"Monty Python's Flying Circus Is Barnstorming Here\". Asked what challenges were left, now that they had made TV shows, films, written books, and produced records, Chapman responded, \"Well, actually world supremacy would be very nice\", before Idle cautioned, \"Yes, but that sort of thing has got to be done properly\".\nIn 1975 ABC broadcast two 90-minute \"Monty Python\" specials, each with three shows, but cut out a total of 24 minutes from each, in part to make time for commercials, and in part to avoid upsetting their audience. As the judge observed in \"Gilliam v. American Broadcasting Companies, Inc.\", where Monty Python sued for damages caused by broadcast of the mutilated version, \"According to the network, appellants should have anticipated that most of the excised material contained scatological references inappropriate for American television and that these scenes would be replaced with commercials, which presumably are more palatable to the American public.\" Monty Python won the case.\nWith the popularity of Python throughout the rest of the 1970s and through most of the 1980s, PBS stations looked at other British comedies, leading to UK shows such as \"Are You Being Served?\" gaining a US audience, and leading, over time, to many PBS stations having a \"British Comedy Night\" which airs many popular UK comedies.\nIn 1976, Monty Python became the top rated show in Japan. The popularity of the show in the Netherlands saw the town of Spijkenisse near Rotterdam open a 'silly walks' road crossing in 2018. Believed to be a world first, the official sign asks pedestrians to cross the road in a comical manner.\nDeparture of Cleese.\nHaving considered the possibility at the end of the second series, Cleese left the \"Flying Circus\" at the end of the third. He later explained that he felt he no longer had anything fresh to offer the show, and claimed that only two sketches penned by Cleese and Chapman in the third series (\"Dennis Moore\" and the \"Cheese Shop\") were truly original, and that the others were bits and pieces from previous work cobbled together in slightly different contexts. He was also finding Chapman, who was at that point in the full throes of alcoholism, difficult to work with. According to an interview with Idle, \"It was on an Air Canada flight on the way to Toronto, when John (Cleese) turned to all of us and said 'I want out.' Why? I don't know. He gets bored more easily than the rest of us. He's a difficult man, not easy to be friendly with. He's so funny because he never wanted to be liked. That gives him a certain fascinating, arrogant freedom.\" \nThe rest of the group carried on for one more \"half\" season before calling a halt to the programme in 1974. While the first three seasons contained 13 episodes each, the fourth ended after just six. The name \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" appears in the opening animation for season four, but in the end credits, the show is listed as simply \"Monty Python\". Although Cleese left the show, he was credited as a writer for three of the six episodes, largely concentrated in the \"Michael Ellis\" episode, which had begun life as one of the many drafts of the \"Holy Grail\" motion picture. When a new direction for \"Grail\" was decided upon, the subplot of Arthur and his knights wandering around a strange department store in modern times was lifted out and recycled as the aforementioned TV episode. Songwriter Neil Innes contributed to some sketches, including \"Appeal on Behalf of Very Rich People\".\nFilms.\n\"And Now for Something Completely Different\" (1971).\nThe Pythons' first feature film was directed by Ian MacNaughton, reprising his role from the television series. It consisted of sketches from the first two seasons of the \"Flying Circus\", reshot on a low budget (and often slightly edited) for cinema release. Material selected for the film includes: \"Dead Parrot\", \"The Lumberjack Song\", \"Upper Class Twit of the Year\", \"Hell's Grannies\", \"Self-Defence Class\", \"How Not to Be Seen\", and \"Nudge Nudge\". Financed by \"Playboy\"'s UK executive Victor Lownes, it was intended as a way of breaking Monty Python into America, and although it was ultimately unsuccessful in this, the film did good business in the UK, and later in the US on the \"Midnight movie\" circuit after their breakthrough television and film success, this being in the era before home video would make the original material much more accessible. The group did not consider the film a success.\n\"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" (1975).\nIn 1974, between production on the third and fourth series, the group decided to embark on their first \"proper\" feature film, containing entirely new material. \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" was based on Arthurian legend and was directed by Jones and Gilliam. Again, the latter also contributed linking animations (and put together the opening credits). Along with the rest of the Pythons, Jones and Gilliam performed several roles in the film, but Chapman took the lead as King Arthur. Cleese returned to the group for the film, feeling that they were once again breaking new ground. \"Holy Grail\" was filmed on location, in picturesque rural areas of Scotland, with a budget of only \u00a3229,000; the money was raised in part with investments from rock groups such as Pink Floyd, Jethro Tull, and Led Zeppelin, as well as UK music industry entrepreneur Tony Stratton Smith (founder and owner of the Charisma Records label, for which the Pythons recorded their comedy albums).\nThe backers of the film wanted to cut the famous Black Knight scene (a Sam Peckinpah send-up in which the Black Knight loses his limbs in a duel), but it was eventually kept in the film. \"Tis but a scratch\" and \"It's just a flesh wound\u2026\" are often quoted. \"Holy Grail\" was selected as the second-best comedy of all time in the ABC special \"Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time\". and viewers in a Channel 4 poll placed it sixth.\n\"Monty Python's Life of Brian\" (1979).\nFollowing the success of \"Holy Grail\", reporters asked for the title of the next Python film, though the team had not even begun to consider a third one. Eventually, Idle flippantly replied \"Jesus Christ \u2013 Lust for Glory\", which became the group's stock answer to such questions. However, they soon began to seriously consider a film lampooning the New Testament era in the same way \"Holy Grail\" had lampooned Arthurian legend. Despite sharing a distrust of organised religion, they agreed not to mock Jesus or his teachings directly. They also mentioned that they could not think of anything legitimate to make fun of about him. Instead, they decided to write a satire on credulity and hypocrisy among the followers of someone [Brian] who had been mistaken for the \"Messiah\", but who had no desire to be followed as such. Terry Jones adds it was a satire on those who for the next 2,000 years \"couldn't agree on what Jesus was saying about peace and love\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We are three wise men.\"\n\"Well, what are you doing creeping around a cow shed at two o'clock in the morning? That doesn't sound very wise to me.\"\n\u2014Early scene from \"Life of Brian\".\nThe focus therefore shifted to a separate individual, Brian Cohen, born at the same time, and in a neighbouring stable. When Jesus appears in the film (first, as a baby in the stable, and then later on the Mount, speaking the Beatitudes), he is played straight (by actor Kenneth Colley) and portrayed with respect. The comedy begins when members of the crowd mishear his statements of peace, love, and tolerance (\"I think he said, 'Blessed are the cheesemakers'\").\nDirecting duties were handled solely by Jones, having amicably agreed with Gilliam that Jones' approach to film-making was better suited for Python's general performing style. \"Holy Grail's\" production had often been stilted by their differences behind the camera. Gilliam again contributed two animated sequences (one being the opening credits) and took charge of set design. The film was shot on location in Tunisia, the finances being provided this time by The Beatles' George Harrison, who together with Denis O'Brien formed the production company Hand-Made Films for the movie. Harrison had a cameo role as the \"owner of the Mount\".\nDespite its subject matter attracting controversy, particularly upon its initial release, it has (together with its predecessor) been ranked among the greatest comedy films. In 2006, it was ranked first on a Channel 4 list of the 50 Greatest Comedy Films. \"Empire\" magazine called it \"an unrivalled satire on religion\". In 2013, Richard Burridge, a theologian decorated by Pope Francis, called \"Life of Brian\" an \"extraordinary tribute to the life and work and teaching of Jesus\u2014that they couldn't actually blaspheme or make a joke out of it. They did a great satire on closed minds and people who follow blindly. Then you have them splitting into factions...it is a wonderful satire on the way that Jesus's own teaching has been used to persecute others. They were satirising fundamentalism and persecution of others and at the same time saying the one person who rises above all this was Jesus\".\n\"Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl\" (1982).\nMonty Python performed four consecutive dates at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles in September 1980 during preparations for \"Meaning of Life\". The performances were filmed and released in the concert film, \"Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl\" (directed by Terry Hughes), with the Pythons performing sketches from the television series in front of an audience. The released film also incorporated footage from the German television specials (the inclusion of which gives Ian MacNaughton his first on-screen credit for Python since the end of \"Flying Circus\") and live performances of several songs from the troupe's then-current \"Monty Python's Contractual Obligation Album\". Monty Python's four-night stint as headliners at the Hollywood Bowl set a record for a comedy act at the venue; it has since been equalled by Dave Chappelle in May 2022.\n\"Monty Python's The Meaning of Life\" (1983).\nThe Pythons' final film returned to something structurally closer to the style of \"Flying Circus\": a series of sketches loosely follows the ages of man from birth to death. Directed again by Jones solo, \"The Meaning of Life\" is embellished with some of the group's most bizarre and disturbing moments, as well as various elaborate musical numbers, which include \"Galaxy Song\" (performed by Idle) and \"Every Sperm Is Sacred\" (performed by Palin and Jones). The film is by far their darkest work, containing a great deal of black humour, garnished by some spectacular violence (including an operation to remove a liver from a living patient without anaesthetic and the morbidly obese Mr. Creosote exploding over several restaurant patrons after finally giving in to the smooth ma\u00eetre d' telling him to eat a mint \u2013 \"It's only a wafer-thin mint...\"). At the time of its release, the Pythons confessed their aim was to offend \"absolutely everyone\", adding \"It is guaranteed to offend\".\nThe Liver Donor scene (in which a paramedic appears at the door of a living man to take his liver) is a satire on bureaucracy, a common Python trope. Besides the opening credits and the fish sequence, Gilliam, by now an established live-action director, no longer wanted to produce any linking cartoons, offering instead to direct one sketch, \"The Crimson Permanent Assurance\". Under his helm, though, the segment grew so ambitious and tangential that it was cut from the movie and used as a supporting feature in its own right. (Television screenings also use it as a prologue.) This was the last project on which all six Pythons collaborated, except for the 1989 compilation \"Parrot Sketch Not Included,\" where they are all seen sitting in a closet for four seconds. This was the last time Chapman appeared on screen with the Pythons.\nAlthough not as acclaimed as its two predecessors (\"Holy Grail\" and \"Life of Brian\"), \"The Meaning of Life\" was still well received critically and was screened at the 1983 Cannes Film Festival where it won the Grand Prix.\n\"Secret Policeman's Ball\" benefit shows.\nMembers of Python contributed their services to charitable endeavours and causes\u2014sometimes as an ensemble, at other times as individuals. The cause that has been the most frequent and consistent beneficiary has been the human rights work of Amnesty International. Between 1976 and 1981, the troupe or its members appeared in four major fund-raisers for Amnesty\u2014known collectively as the \"Secret Policeman's Ball\" shows\u2014which were turned into multiple films, TV shows, videos, record albums, and books. The brainchild of John Cleese, these benefit shows in London and their many spin-offs raised considerable sums of money for Amnesty, raised public and media awareness of the human rights cause, and influenced many other members of the entertainment community (especially rock musicians) to become involved in political and social issues. Among the many musicians who have publicly attributed their activism\u2014and the organisation of their own benefit events\u2014to the inspiration of the work in this field of Monty Python are Bob Geldof (organiser of Live Aid), U2, Pete Townshend, and Sting. Bono told \"Rolling Stone\" in 1986, \"I saw \"The Secret Policeman's Ball\" and it became a part of me. It sowed a seed...\" Sting stated, \"before [the Ball] I did not know about Amnesty, I did not know about its work, I did not know about torture in the world.\" On the impact of the Ball on Geldof, Sting quipped, \"he took the 'Ball' and ran with it.\"\n\"Ball\" co-founder Cleese and Jones had an involvement (as performer, writer or director) in all four Amnesty benefit shows, Palin in three, Chapman in two, and Gilliam in one. Idle did not participate in the Amnesty shows. Notwithstanding Idle's lack of participation, the other five members (together with \"Associate Pythons\" Carol Cleveland and Neil Innes) all appeared together in the first \"Secret Policeman's Ball\" benefit\u2014the 1976 \"A Poke in the Eye\" held at Her Majesty's Theatre in London's West End\u2014where they performed several Python sketches. In this first show, they were collectively billed as \"Monty Python\". Peter Cook deputised for the absent Idle in a courtroom sketch. In the next three shows, the participating Python members performed many Python sketches, but were billed under their individual names rather than under the collective Python banner. The second show featured newcomer Rowan Atkinson and Scottish comedian Billy Connolly. The \"Secret Policeman's Ball\" were the first stage shows in the UK to present comedic performers (such as Monty Python and Rowan Atkinson) in the same setting and shows as their contemporaries in rock music (which included Eric Clapton, Sting and Phil Collins). After a six-year break, Amnesty resumed producing \"Secret Policeman's Ball\" benefit shows which were held at the London Palladium in 1987 (sometimes with, and sometimes without, variants of the title) and by 2006 had presented a total of twelve shows. Since 1987, the Balls featured newer generations of British comedic performers, such as Stephen Fry, Hugh Laurie, and puppets from the satirical TV show \"Spitting Image\", with many attributing their participation in the show to their desire to emulate the Python's pioneering work for Amnesty. Cleese and Palin made a brief cameo appearance in the 1989 Amnesty show; apart from that, the Pythons have not appeared in shows after the first four.\nGoing solo.\nEach member has pursued various film, television, and stage projects since the break-up of the group, but often continued to work with one another. Many of these collaborations were very successful, most notably \"A Fish Called Wanda\" (1988), written by Cleese, in which he starred along with Palin. The pair also appeared in \"Time Bandits\" (1981), a film directed by Gilliam, who wrote it together with Palin. Gilliam directed \"Jabberwocky\" (1977), and also directed and co-wrote \"Brazil\" (1985), which featured Palin, \"The Adventures of Baron Munchausen\" (1988), which featured Idle; he followed these with writing and directing an additional six (as of 2021) films.\nHandMade Films, the film studio that George Harrison co-founded to produce \"Life of Brian\", contributed to British cinema in the 1980s, producing classics of the period including \"The Long Good Friday\" and \"Mona Lisa\" (both starring Bob Hoskins), \"Time Bandits\", and \"Withnail and I\", with the studio also launching Terry Gilliam's directorial career. \"Yellowbeard\" (1983) was co-written by Chapman and starred Chapman, Idle, and Cleese, as well as many other English comedians including Peter Cook, Spike Milligan, and Marty Feldman.\nPalin and Jones wrote the comedic TV series \"Ripping Yarns\" (1976\u201379), starring Palin. Jones also appeared in the pilot episode and Cleese appeared in a nonspeaking part in the episode \"Golden Gordon\". Jones' film \"Erik the Viking\" also has Cleese playing a small part. In 1996 Terry Jones wrote and directed an adaptation of Kenneth Grahame's novel \"The Wind in the Willows\". It featured four members of Monty Python: Jones as Mr. Toad, Idle as Ratty, Cleese as Mr. Toad's lawyer, and Palin as the Sun. Gilliam was considered for the voice of the river. The film included Steve Coogan who played Mole.\nCleese has the most prolific solo career, appearing in dozens of films, several TV shows or series (including \"Cheers\", \"3rd Rock from the Sun\", Q's assistant in the James Bond movies, and \"Will &amp; Grace\"), many direct-to-video productions, some video games and a number of commercials. His BBC sitcom \"Fawlty Towers\" (written by and starring Cleese together with his wife Connie Booth) is the only comedy series to rank higher than the \"Flying Circus\" on the BFI TV 100's list, topping the whole poll. Cleese's character, Basil Fawlty, was ranked second (to Homer Simpson) on Channel 4's 2001 list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters.\nIdle enjoyed critical success with \"Rutland Weekend Television\" in the mid-1970s, out of which came the Beatles parody the Rutles (responsible for the cult mockumentary \"All You Need Is Cash\"), and as an actor in \"Nuns on the Run\" (1990) with Robbie Coltrane. In 1976 Idle directed music videos for George Harrison songs \"This Song\" and \"Crackerbox Palace\", the latter of which also featured cameo appearances from Neil Innes and John Cleese. Idle has had success with Python songs: \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\" went to no. 3 in the UK singles chart in 1991. The song had been revived by Simon Mayo on BBC Radio 1, and was consequently released as a single that year. The theatrical phenomenon of the Python musical \"Spamalot\" has made Idle the most financially successful of the troupe after Python. Written by Idle (and featuring a pre-recorded cameo of Cleese as the voice of God), it has proved to be an enormous hit on Broadway, London's West End and Las Vegas. This was followed by \"Not the Messiah\", which revises \"The Life of Brian\" as an oratorio. For the work's 2007 premiere at the Luminato festival in Toronto (which commissioned the work), Idle himself sang the \"baritone-ish\" part.\nAfter \"Python\" reunions.\nSince \"The Meaning of Life\", their last project as a team, the Pythons have often been the subject of reunion rumours. In 1988 Monty Python won the BAFTA Award for Outstanding British Contribution To Cinema, with four of the six Pythons (Jones, Palin, Gilliam and Chapman) collecting the award. The final appearance of all six together occurred during the 1989 \"Parrot Sketch Not Included \u2013 20 Years of Monty Python\" TV special. Chapman's death in October 1989 put an end to the speculation of any further reunions. However, there were several occasions after 1989 when the remaining five members gathered together for appearances \u2014 albeit not formal reunions. In 1996 Jones, Idle, Cleese, and Palin were featured in a film adaptation of \"The Wind in the Willows\", which was later renamed \"Mr. Toad's Wild Ride\". In 1997, Palin and Cleese rolled out a new version of the \"Dead Parrot sketch\" for \"Saturday Night Live\".\nMonty Python were the inaugural recipients of the Empire Inspiration Award in 1997. Palin, Jones and Gilliam received the award on stage in London from Elton John while Cleese and Idle appeared via satellite from Los Angeles. In 1998, during the US Comedy Arts Festival, where the troupe were awarded the AFI Star Award by the American Film Institute, the five remaining members, along with what was purported to be Chapman's ashes, were reunited on stage for the first time in 18 years. The occasion was in the form of an interview called \"Monty Python Live at Aspen\", (hosted by Robert Klein, with an appearance by Eddie Izzard) in which the team looked back at some of their work and performed a few new sketches. On 9 October 1999, to commemorate 30 years since the first \"Flying Circus\" television broadcast, BBC2 devoted an evening to Python programmes, including a documentary charting the history of the team, interspersed with new sketches by the Monty Python team filmed especially for the event.\nThe surviving Pythons had agreed in principle to perform a live tour of America in 1999. Several shows were to be linked with Q&amp;A meetings in various cities. Although all had said yes, Palin later changed his mind, much to the annoyance of Idle, who had begun work organising the tour. This led to Idle refusing to take part in the new material shot for the BBC anniversary evening. In 2002, four of the surviving members, bar Cleese, performed \"The Lumberjack Song\" and \"Sit on My Face\" for George Harrison's memorial concert. The reunion also included regular supporting contributors Neil Innes and Carol Cleveland, with a special appearance from Tom Hanks. In an interview to publicise the DVD release of \"The Meaning of Life\", Cleese said a further reunion was unlikely. \"It is absolutely impossible to get even a majority of us together in a room, and I'm not joking,\" Cleese said. He said that the problem was one of busyness rather than one of bad feelings. A sketch appears on the same DVD spoofing the impossibility of a full reunion, bringing the members \"together\" in a deliberately unconvincing fashion with modern bluescreen/greenscreen techniques.\nIdle responded to queries about a Python reunion by adapting a line used by George Harrison in response to queries about a possible Beatles reunion. When asked about such a possibility in November 1989, Harrison responded: \"As far as I'm concerned, there won't be a Beatles reunion as long as John Lennon remains dead.\" Idle's version of this was that he expected to see a proper Python reunion, \"just as soon as Graham Chapman comes back from the dead\", but added, \"we're talking to his agent about terms.\"\n\"The Pythons Autobiography by The Pythons\" (2003), compiled from interviews with the surviving members, reveals that a series of disputes in 1998, over a possible sequel to \"Holy Grail\" that had been conceived by Idle, may have resulted in the group's split. Cleese's feeling was that \"The Meaning of Life\" had been personally difficult and ultimately mediocre, and did not wish to be involved in another Python project for a variety of reasons (not least amongst them was the absence of Chapman, whose straight man-like central roles in the \"Grail\" and \"Brian\" films had been considered to be an essential anchoring performance). The book also reveals that Cleese saw Chapman as his \"greatest sounding board. If Graham thought something was funny, then it almost certainly was funny. You cannot believe how invaluable that is.' Ultimately it was Cleese who ended the possibility of another Python movie.\nA full, if nonperforming, reunion of the surviving Python members appeared at the March 2005 premiere of Idle's musical \"Spamalot\". Based on \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\", it also spoofs popular musicals, including those of Andrew Lloyd Webber. It opened in Chicago and has since played in New York on Broadway, London, and numerous other major cities across the world. In 2004, \"Spamalot\" was nominated for 14 Tony Awards and won three: Best Musical, Best Direction of a Musical for Mike Nichols, and Best Performance by a Featured Actress in a Musical for Sara Ramirez, who played the Lady of the Lake, a character specially added for the musical. The original Broadway cast included Tim Curry as King Arthur, Michael McGrath as Patsy, David Hyde Pierce as Sir Robin, Hank Azaria as Sir Lancelot and other roles (e.g., the French Taunter, Knight of Ni, and Tim the Enchanter), Christopher Sieber as Sir Galahad and other roles (e.g., the Black Knight and Prince Herbert's Father). Cleese played the voice of God, a role played in the film by Chapman.\nOwing in part to the success of \"Spamalot\", PBS announced on 13 July 2005 that it would begin to re-air the entire run of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" and new one-hour specials focusing on each member of the group, called \"Monty Python's Personal Best\". Each episode was written and produced by the individual being honoured, with the five remaining Pythons collaborating on Chapman's programme, the only one of the editions to take on a serious tone with its new material.\nIn 2009, to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the first episode of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", a six-part documentary entitled \"\" was released, featuring interviews with the surviving members of the team, as well as archive interviews with Graham Chapman and numerous excerpts from the television series and films. Each episode opens with a different re-recording of the theme song from \"Life of Brian\", with Iron Maiden vocalist and Python fan Bruce Dickinson performing the sixth.\nAlso in commemoration of the 40th anniversary, Idle, Palin, Jones, and Gilliam appeared in a production of \"Not the Messiah\" at the Royal Albert Hall. The European premiere was held on 23 October 2009. An official 40th anniversary Monty Python reunion event took place in New York City on 15 October 2009, where the team received a Special Award from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts.\nIn June 2011, it was announced that \"\", an animated 3D movie based on the memoir of Graham Chapman, was in the making. The memoir \"A Liar's Autobiography\" was published in 1980 and details Chapman's journey through medical school, alcoholism, acknowledgement of his gay identity, and the tolls of surreal comedy. Asked what was true in a deliberately fanciful account by Chapman of his life, Terry Jones joked: \"Nothing\u00a0... it's all a downright, absolute, blackguardly lie.\" The film uses Chapman's own voice\u2014from a reading of his autobiography shortly before he died of cancer\u2014and entertainment channel Epix announced the film's release in early 2012 in both 2D and 3D formats. Produced and directed by London-based Bill Jones, Ben Timlett, and Jeff Simpson, the new film has 15 animation companies working on chapters that will range from three to 12 minutes in length, each in a different style. John Cleese recorded dialogue which was matched with Chapman's voice. Michael Palin voiced Chapman's father and Terry Jones voiced his mother. Terry Gilliam voiced Graham's psychiatrist. They all play various other roles. Among the original Python group, only Eric Idle was not involved.\nOn 26 January 2012, Terry Jones announced that the five surviving Pythons would reunite in a sci-fi comedy film called \"Absolutely Anything\". The film would combine computer-generated imagery and live action. It would be directed by Jones based on a script by Jones and Gavin Scott, and in addition to the Python members it would also star Simon Pegg, Kate Beckinsale and Robin Williams (in his final film role). The plot revolves around a teacher who discovers aliens (voiced by the Pythons) have given him magical powers to do \"absolutely anything\". Eric Idle responded via Twitter that he would not, in fact, be participating, although he was later added to the cast.\n\"Monty Python Live (Mostly): One Down, Five to Go\".\nIn 2013, the Pythons lost a legal case to Mark Forstater, the film producer of \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\", over royalties for the derivative work \"Spamalot\". They owed a combined \u00a3800,000 in legal fees and back royalties to Forstater. They proposed a reunion show to pay their legal bill.\nOn 19 November 2013, a new reunion was reported, following months of \"secret talks\". The original plan was for a live, one-off stage show at the O2 Arena in London on 1 July 2014, with \"some of Monty Python's greatest hits, with modern, topical, Pythonesque twists\" according to a press release. The tickets for this show went on sale in November 2013 and sold out in just 43 seconds. Nine additional shows were added, all of them at the O2, the last on 20 July. They have said that their reunion was inspired by \"South Park\" creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone, who are massive Monty Python fans.\nMick Jagger and Charlie Watts featured in a promotional video for the shows: \"Who wants to see that again, really? It's a bunch of wrinkly old men trying to relive their youth and make a load of money\u2014the best one died years ago!\" Michael Palin stated that the final reunion show on 20 July 2014 would be the last time that the troupe would perform together. It was screened to 2,000 cinemas around the world. Prior to the final night, Idle stated, \"It is a world event and that's really quite exciting. It means we're actually going to say goodbye publicly on one show. Nobody ever has the chance to do that. The Beatles didn't get a last good night.\" The last show was broadcast in the UK on Gold TV and internationally in cinemas by Fathom Events through a Dish Network satellite link.\nIn April 2015, the five surviving Pythons participated in a reunion event moderated by John Oliver as part of the Tribeca Festival at the Beacon Theatre in New York City following a 40th anniversary screening of \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\".\nBroadcast rights.\nNetflix secured the global streaming rights for the Monty Python catalogue in 2018. Shout Factory picked up American and Canadian distribution rights from Netflix in 2024.\nPython members.\nGraham Chapman.\nGraham Chapman was originally a medical student, joining the Footlights at Cambridge. He completed his medical training and was legally entitled to practise as a doctor. Chapman is best remembered for the lead roles in \"Holy Grail\", as King Arthur, and \"Life of Brian\", as Brian Cohen. He died of metastatic throat cancer on 4 October 1989. At Chapman's memorial service, Cleese delivered an irreverent eulogy that included all the euphemisms for being dead from the \"Dead Parrot\" sketch, which they had written. Chapman's comedic fictional memoir, \"\", was adapted into an in 2012.\nJohn Cleese.\nJohn Cleese is the oldest Python. He met his future Python writing partner, Chapman, in Cambridge. Outside of Python, he is best known for setting up the Video Arts group and for the sitcom \"Fawlty Towers\" (co-written with Connie Booth, whom Cleese met during work on Python and to whom he was married for a decade). In \"Fawlty Towers\" Cleese starred as hotel owner Basil Fawlty, and received the 1980 British Academy Television Award for Best Entertainment Performance. Cleese has also co-authored several books on psychology and wrote the screenplay for the award-winning \"A Fish Called Wanda\", in which he starred with Michael Palin, and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay.\nTerry Gilliam.\nTerry Gilliam, an American by birth, is the only member of the troupe of non-British origin. He started off as an animator and strip cartoonist for Harvey Kurtzman's \"Help!\" magazine, one issue of which featured Cleese. Moving from the US to England, he animated features for \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\" and was then asked by its makers to join them on their next project: \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\". He co-directed \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" and directed short segments of other Python films (for instance \"The Crimson Permanent Assurance\", the short film that appears before \"The Meaning of Life\"). Gilliam has directed thirteen films in total, and collaborated with Palin on three of them, which included Palin starring in \"Brazil\" (1985).\nEric Idle.\nWhen Monty Python was first formed, two writing partnerships existed, Cleese and Chapman, Jones and Palin. That left Gilliam, operating solo due to the nature of his work, and Eric Idle. Regular themes in Idle's contributions were elaborate wordplay and musical numbers. After \"Flying Circus\", Idle\u2019s first solo project was the TV series \"Rutland Weekend Television\", which lasted for two series in 1975 and 1976. He then hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" four times in the first five seasons. Idle's initially successful solo career faltered in the 1990s with the failures of his 1993 film \"Splitting Heirs\" (written, produced by, and starring him) and 1998's \"\" (in which he starred). He revived his career by returning to the source of his worldwide fame, adapting Monty Python material for other media. Idle wrote the Tony Award-winning musical \"Spamalot\", based on \"Holy Grail\". Following the success of the musical he wrote \"Not the Messiah\", an oratorio derived from the \"Life of Brian\". Representing Monty Python, Idle featured in a one-hour symphony of British Music when he performed at the London 2012 Olympic Games closing ceremony.\nTerry Jones.\nTerry Jones has been described by other members of the team as the \"heart\" of the operation. Jones had a lead role in maintaining the group's unity and creative independence. Python biographer George Perry has commented that should \"[you] speak to him on subjects as diverse as fossil fuels, or Rupert Bear, or mercenaries in the Middle Ages or Modern China\u00a0... in a moment you will find yourself hopelessly out of your depth, floored by his knowledge.\" Many others agree that Jones is characterised by his irrepressible, good-natured enthusiasm. Jones' passion often led to prolonged arguments with other group members\u2014in particular Cleese\u2014with Jones often unwilling to back down. Since his major contributions were largely behind the scenes (direction, writing), and he often deferred to the other members of the group as an actor, Jones' importance to Python was often underrated. He does have the legacy of delivering possibly the most famous line in all of Python, as Brian's mother Mandy in \"Life of Brian\", \"He's not the Messiah, he's a very naughty boy!\", a line voted the funniest in film history on two occasions. Jones died on 21 January 2020 from complications of dementia.\nMichael Palin.\nSir Michael Palin attended Oxford, where he met his Python writing partner Jones. The two also wrote the series \"Ripping Yarns\" together. Palin and Jones originally wrote face-to-face, but soon found it was more productive to write apart and then come together to review what the other had written. Therefore, Jones and Palin's sketches tended to be more focused than that of the others, taking one bizarre situation, sticking to it, and building on it. After \"Flying Circus\", Palin hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" four times in the first 10 seasons. His comedy output began to decrease in amount following the increasing success of his travel documentaries for the BBC. Palin released a book of diaries from the Python years entitled \"Michael Palin Diaries 1969\u20131979\", published in 2007. Palin was awarded a knighthood in the 2019 New Year Honours, which was announced by Buckingham Palace in December 2018.\nAssociate Pythons.\nSeveral people have been accorded unofficial \"associate Python\" status over the years. Occasionally, such people have been referred to as the 'seventh Python', in a style reminiscent of George Martin (or other associates of the Beatles) being dubbed \"the Fifth Beatle\". The two collaborators with the most meaningful and plentiful contributions have been Neil Innes and Carol Cleveland. Both were present and presented as Associate Pythons at the official Monty Python 25th-anniversary celebrations held in Los Angeles in July 1994.\nNeil Innes is the only non-Python besides Douglas Adams to be credited with writing material for \"Flying Circus\". He appeared in sketches and the Python films, as well as performing some of his songs in \"Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl\". He was also a regular stand-in for absent team members on the rare occasions when they recreated sketches. For example, he took the place of Cleese at the Concert for George. Gilliam once noted that if anyone qualified for the title of the seventh Python, it would be Innes. He was one of the creative talents in the off-beat Bonzo Dog Band. He would later portray Ron Nasty of the Rutles and write all of the Rutles' compositions for \"All You Need Is Cash\" (1978), a mockumentary film co-directed by Idle. By 2005, a falling out had occurred between Idle and Innes over additional Rutles projects, the results being Innes' critically acclaimed Rutles \"reunion\" album \"The Rutles: Archaeology\" and Idle's straight-to-DVD \"The Rutles 2: Can't Buy Me Lunch\", each undertaken without the other's participation. According to an interview with Idle in the \"Chicago Tribune\" in May 2005, his attitude is that Innes and he go back \"too far. And no further.\" Innes died of a heart attack on 29 December 2019 near Toulouse, where he had lived for several years.\nCarol Cleveland was the most important female performer in the Monty Python ensemble, commonly referred to as \"the female Python\". She was originally hired by producer/director John Howard Davies for just the first five episodes of the \"Flying Circus\". The Pythons then pushed to make Cleveland a permanent recurring performer after producer/director Ian MacNaughton brought in several other actresses who were not as good as she was. Cleveland went on to appear in about two-thirds of the episodes, as well as in all of the Python films, and in most of their stage shows, as well. According to \"Time\", her most recognisable film roles are playing Zoot and Dingo, two maidens in the Castle Anthrax in \"Holy Grail\".\nOther contributors.\nCleese's first wife, Connie Booth, appeared as various characters in all four series of \"Flying Circus\". Her most significant role was the \"best girl\" of the eponymous Lumberjack in \"The Lumberjack Song\", though this role was sometimes played by Carol Cleveland. Booth appeared in a total of six sketches and also played one-off characters in Python feature films \"And Now for Something Completely Different\" and \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\".\nDouglas Adams was \"discovered\" by Chapman when a version of \"Footlights Revue\" (a 1974 BBC2 television show featuring some of Adams' early work) was performed live in London's West End. In Cleese's absence from the final TV series, the two formed a brief writing partnership, with Adams earning a writing credit in one episode for a sketch called \"Patient Abuse\". In the sketch\u2014a satire on mind-boggling bureaucracy\u2014a man who had been stabbed by a nurse arrives at his doctor's office bleeding profusely from the stomach, when the doctor makes him fill in numerous senseless forms before he can administer treatment. He also had two cameo appearances in this season. Firstly, in the episode \"The Light Entertainment War\", Adams shows up in a surgeon's mask (as Dr. Emile Koning, according to the on-screen captions), pulling on gloves, while Palin narrates a sketch that introduces one person after another, and never actually gets started. Secondly, at the beginning of \"Mr. Neutron\", Adams is dressed in a \"pepperpot\" outfit and loads a missile onto a cart being driven by Terry Jones, who is calling out for scrap metal (\"Any old iron\u00a0...\"). Adams and Chapman also subsequently attempted a few non-Python projects, including \"Out of the Trees\". He also contributed to a sketch on the soundtrack album for \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\".\nOther than Carol Cleveland, the only other non-Python to make a significant number of appearances in the \"Flying Circus\" was Ian Davidson. He appeared in the first two series of the show, and played over 10 roles. While Davidson is primarily known as a scriptwriter, it is not known if he had any contribution toward the writing of the sketches, as he is only credited as a performer. In total, Davidson is credited as appearing in eight episodes of the show, which is more than any other male actor who was not a Python. Despite this, Davidson did not appear in any Python-related media subsequent to series 2, though footage of him was shown on the documentary \"Python Night \u2013 30 Years of Monty Python\".\nStand-up comedian Eddie Izzard, a devoted fan of the group, has occasionally stood in for absent members. When the BBC held a \"Python Night\" in 1999 to celebrate 30 years of the first broadcast of \"Flying Circus\", the Pythons recorded some new material with Izzard standing in for Idle, who had declined to partake in person (he taped a solo contribution from the US). Izzard hosted \"The Life of Python\" (1999), a history of the group that was part of Python Night and appeared with them at a festival/tribute in Aspen, Colorado, in 1998 (released on DVD as \"Live at Aspen\"). Izzard has said that Monty Python was a significant influence on her style of comedy and Cleese has referred to her as \"the lost Python\".\nSeries director of \"Flying Circus\", Ian MacNaughton, is also regularly associated with the group and made a few on-screen appearances in the show and in the film \"And Now for Something Completely Different\". Apart from Neil Innes, others to contribute musically included Fred Tomlinson and the Fred Tomlinson Singers. They made appearances in songs such as \"The Lumberjack Song\" as a backup choir. Other contributors and performers for the Pythons included John Howard Davies, John Hughman, Lyn Ashley, Bob Raymond, John Young, Rita Davies, Stanley Mason, Maureen Flanagan, and David Ballantyne.\nCultural influence and legacy.\nBy the time of Monty Python's 25th anniversary, in 1994, the point was already being made that \"the five surviving members had with the passing years begun to occupy an institutional position in the edifice of British social culture that they had once had so much fun trying to demolish\". A similar point is made in a 2006 book on the relationship between Python and philosophy: \"It is remarkable, after all, not only that the utterly bizarre \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" was sponsored by the BBC in the first place, but that Monty Python itself grew into an institution of enormous cultural influence.\"\nRon Devillier, the PBS programming director who put \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" on American television, states, \"they brought through a kind of phony baloney surface ethic that we all lived under and shot right through it and split it in half. If you really let it happen, you could laugh at yourself. All the things that they were doing were really funny like playing on our sensibilities and making fun of them in a very funny way, pointing out how pompous we can be and making fun of themselves at the same time.\" Danny Gallagher of the \"Dallas Observer\" writes, \"Monty Python has also been good to American comedy. If America's television viewing public had never seen \"The Lumberjack Song\" or \"The Dead Parrot\" sketch, we might still be holding up \"The Sonny &amp; Cher Comedy Hour\" as a supreme example of cutting-edge TV comedy.\" \"The Benny Hill Show\", featuring the slapstick and innuendo of Benny Hill, which contrasted with Python's more absurdist style, was also a hugely successful British comedy on US television, with Charles Isherwood writing in \"The New York Times\": \"Benny\" and \"Monty\" were essential poles of British television comedy as imported to America in the 1970s.\"\nA self-contained comedy unit responsible for both writing and performing their work, Monty Python's influence on comedy has been compared to the Beatles' influence on music. Author Neil Gaiman writes, \"A strange combination of individuals gave us Python. And you needed those people, just in the same way that with the Beatles you had four talented people, but together you had the Beatles. And I think that's so incredibly true when it comes to Python.\"\nComedy stylists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Everything I've ever done can be distilled to at least one Python sketch. If comedy had a periodic element table, Python would have more than one atom on it.\"\n\u2014Mike Myers.\nMonty Python have been named as being influential to the comedy stylings of a great many people including: Sacha Baron Cohen, David Cross, Rowan Atkinson, Seth MacFarlane, Seth Meyers, Trey Parker, Matt Stone, Vic and Bob, Mike Myers, Russell Brand, Robin Williams, Jerry Seinfeld, Eddie Izzard, and \"Weird Al\" Yankovic. Matt Groening, creator of \"The Simpsons\", was influenced by Python's \"high velocity sense of the absurd and not stopping to explain yourself\", and pays tribute through a couch gag used in seasons five and six. Appearing on \"Monty Python's Best Bits (Mostly)\", Jim Carrey\u2014who refers to Monty Python as the \"Super Justice League of comedy\"\u2014recalled the effect on him of Ernest Scribbler (played by Palin) laughing himself to death in \"The Funniest Joke in the World\" sketch. Nick Park, creator of \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\", was inspired by Gilliam's animation in Monty Python \"to be a bit wacky and off the wall\". Simon Pegg, co-writer of the \"Three Flavours Cornetto\" trilogy of British comedy films (from \"Shaun of the Dead\" to \"The World's End\"), stated his \"love of comedy was hugely informed by Monty Python\". Jerry Seinfeld told \"Parade\", \"Monty Python was a gigantic influence on me. They were just about silly, funny things that meant nothing, and that's the stuff I love. There's a wonderful childlike freedom in those kinds of things.\" \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" served as an inspiration for voice actor Rob Paulsen in voicing Pinky from the animated television series \"Animaniacs\" and \"Pinky and the Brain\", giving the character \"a goofy whack job\" of a British accent. Graham Linehan, co-creator of the sitcom \"Father Ted\", cited the ineffectual protest of \"Life of Brian\" upon its release as an influence for the \"Father Ted\" episode \"The Passion of Saint Tibulus\".\nComedian John Oliver states, \"Writing about the importance of Monty Python is basically pointless. Citing them as an influence is almost redundant. It's assumed. This strange group of wildly talented, appropriately disrespectful, hugely imaginative and massively inspirational idiots changed what comedy could be for their generation and for those that followed.\" On how Python's freeform style influenced sketch comedy, Tina Fey of the American television show \"Saturday Night Live\" states, \"Sketch endings are overrated. Their key was to do something as long as it was funny and then just stop and do something else.\" Stephen Merchant, co-creator of \"The Office\" with Ricky Gervais, stated, \"I don't remember where I got this grand idea that I could somehow be John Cleese. That was my overriding passion from my mid-teens. Cleese had grown up in Weston-Super-Mare, not far from Bristol where I grew up, and he was tall and he was very funny and very British and it's almost like I thought 'well if they want tall people from the west country I can do that.'\"\n\"Pythonesque\".\nAmong the more visible cultural influences of Monty Python is the inclusion of terms either directly from, or derived from, Monty Python, into the lexicon of the English language.\nTV.\nThe Japanese anime series \"Girls und Panzer\" featured the special episode \"Survival War!\", which referenced the \"Spam\" sketch, but the word \"spam\" was censored to avoid legal issue with the Pythons.\nThings named after Monty Python.\nBeyond a dictionary definition, Python terms have entered the lexicon in other ways.\nWorld records.\nOn St George's Day, 23 April 2007, the cast and creators of \"Spamalot\" gathered in Trafalgar Square under the tutelage of the two Terrys (Jones and Gilliam) to set a new record for the world's largest coconut orchestra. They led 5,567 people \"clip-clopping\" in time to the Python classic, \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\", for the \"Guinness World Records\" attempt.\nOn 5 October 2019, to mark the 50th anniversary of Monty Python's first show, the \"first official Monty Python Guinness world record attempt\" tried to break the record for \"the largest gathering of people dressed as Gumbys.\" A recurring character on the show, a Gumby wears a handkerchief on their head, has spectacles, braces, a knitted tank top, and Wellington boots. The shirt sleeves and trouser legs are always rolled up, exposing their socks and knees. Dimwitted, their most famous catchphrases are \"My brain hurts!\" and repeated shouts of \"Hello!\" and \"Sorry!\"\nMedia.\nFilms.\nFive Monty Python productions were released as theatrical films:\nBooks.\nBooks by Monty Python\nScript books\nCompilations\nBooks about Monty Python by Pythons\nOther books about Monty Python\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18943", "revid": "18515189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18943", "title": "Married... with Children", "text": "American sitcom (1987\u20131997)\nMarried... with Children is an American television sitcom created by Michael G. Moye and Ron Leavitt for the Fox Broadcasting Company, broadcast from April 5, 1987, to June 9, 1997. It is the longest-running live-action sitcom ever aired on Fox. \"Married... with Children\" was the first primetime series broadcast on the new Fox network. The series' run ended with the episode broadcast on May 5, 1997. Two previously unaired episodes were broadcast on June 9, 1997, and June 18, 2002.\nThe show is set in Chicago and follows the lives of Al Bundy, a former high school football player turned hard-luck women's shoe salesman; his lazy wife Peggy; their daughter Kelly; and their son Bud. The show also features their neighbors Steve and Marcy Rhoades, both of whom Al finds annoying, and who feel the same way about him. Later in the series, Marcy marries Jefferson D'Arcy, a white-collar criminal and former CIA agent who becomes her \"trophy husband\" and Al's best friend.\nThe series is one of the longest-running sitcoms in American television history, covering 11 seasons with 259 episodes in its run. Its theme song is \"Love and Marriage\" by Sammy Cahn and Jimmy Van Heusen, performed by Frank Sinatra. Critical reception was mixed during its original run, and the show's sexually charged humor and depiction of a dysfunctional family were in stark contrast to family sitcoms of the era.\nThe first two seasons were videotaped in front of a studio audience at ABC Television Center in the Los Feliz section of Los Angeles, with seasons 3 through 8 recorded at Sunset Gower Studios in Hollywood, and seasons 9 through 11 at Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City. The series was a production of Columbia Pictures Television for FOX, through Embassy Communications for Season 1 and ELP Communications for Seasons 2-11.\nIn 2008, the show made the top 100 on \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s \"New TV Classics\" list, placing number 94. In May 2022, an animated revival was in the works.\nCast and characters.\nPilot episode.\nIn the show's pilot episode, actors Tina Caspary and Hunter Carson played the roles of Kelly and Bud Bundy, respectively. Before the series aired publicly the roles for the two Bundy children were re-cast. Ed O'Neill and the show's producers worried about a lack of chemistry with the parents and the original actors cast as the children. A re-casting was done and all of the scenes in the pilot with Carson and Caspary were re-shot with David Faustino and Christina Applegate playing Bud and Kelly Bundy.\nDevelopment.\nThe working title of \"Married... with Children\" was \"Not the Cosbys\", as a mockery of family sitcoms that were common on primetime television in the mid-1980s such as \"The Cosby Show\". Creators Ron Leavitt and Michael G. Moye were told by Garth Ancier and other Fox executives \"to be as outrageous as they could be, doing the sort of material the Big Three would never allow on the air\", wrote Daniel M. Kimmel in 2004. However, Fox CEO Barry Diller had initial doubts that \"Married... with Children\" would be successful.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nFor season 1, Metacritic calculated an average of 58 out of 100 based on 5 reviews, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\". Reviews of the debut episode were mixed. In 1987, Howard Rosenberg of the \"Los Angeles Times\" praised the casting of the Bundys, found the character development of the Rhodes lacking, and warned viewers: \"The satire is heavy-handed.\" Conversely, also in 1987, Tom Shales of \"The Washington Post\" called the debut episode \"nasty-minded, overacted and poorly cast\". For \"The New York Times\", John J. O'Connor described it as \"loud, coarse and life-of-the-party vulgar\". O'Connor also compared \"Married...\" unfavorably to other family shows like \"The Life of Riley\" and \"All in the Family\", describing the show as \"pure blue-collar shtick, dressed up with the usual sexual-potency and bathroom jokes\".\nRatings.\nDespite the show's enduring popularity and fanbase, \"Married... with Children\" was never a major ratings success. Part of the reason was that Fox, a startup network, did not have the affiliate base of the Big Three television networks, thus preventing the series from reaching the entire country. In an interview for a special commemorating the series' 20-year anniversary in 2007, Katey Sagal stated that part of the problem the series faced was that many areas of the country were able to get Fox only through low-quality UHF channels well into the early 1990s, while some areas of the country did not receive the new network at all, a problem not largely rectified until the launch of Foxnet in June 1991 and later the network's acquisition of National Football League rights which led to several stations across the United States changing affiliations. For instance, Ed O'Neill's hometown of Youngstown, Ohio did not have its own Fox affiliate until CBS affiliate WKBN-TV signed on WFXI-CA/WYFX-LP in 1998, one year after the show went off the air (the area was served by WPGH-TV in Pittsburgh and Cleveland's Fox affiliates\u2014initially WOIO, then WJW\u2014as default affiliates on cable), so many of O'Neill's friends and family mistakenly thought he was famous for beer commercials during this time.\nAnother problem lay in the fact that many of the newly developed series on Fox were unsuccessful, which kept the network from building a popular lineup to draw in a larger audience. In its original airing debut, \"Married... with Children\" was part of a Sunday lineup that competed with the popular \"Murder, She Wrote\" and Sunday-night movie on CBS. Fellow freshman series included \"Duet\", cancelled in 1989, along with \"It's Garry Shandling's Show\" and \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", both of which were canceled in 1990. The success of \"The Simpsons\", which debuted on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" in 1987, helped draw some viewers over to Fox, allowing \"Married... with Children\" to rank in the Nielsen Top 50 from Season 4 through Season 8, peaking at No. 37 in Season 6. Although these ratings were somewhat small in comparison with the other three networks, they were good enough for Fox to keep renewing the show. In its prime in the early 1990s, the show was averaging over 20 million viewers each week.\nWhile the series did not end on a cliffhanger, it was expected to be renewed for a 12th season (which would have been the final season) and thus did not have a proper series finale when Fox decided to cancel it in 1997. With Fox announcing the cancellation publicly before informing the cast and crew, most if not all of them found out about the series cancellation from fans and low-level employees instead of from network executives. Katey Sagal stated that she constantly felt that the series was neglected by Fox despite helping bring the fledgling network on the map (\"Married... with Children\" having been on even before \"The Simpsons\"); for his part, Ed O'Neill attributed possible neglect of the series by Fox to constant turnover of some of the top positions at the network. In a 2013 interview, O'Neill stated that he felt TV stations who owned syndication rights to the series put pressure on Fox and Sony Pictures Television to end the series since the show had nearly three times the episodes needed for syndication and the production of more episodes would have resulted in higher rights fees.\nControversy and legacy.\nThe sexual humor and depiction of family life on \"Married... with Children\" were controversial from its debut. Daniel M. Kimmel reflected on the show in 2004: \"It had achieved a cult status as a somewhat tasteless family sitcom that was so well written and acted that some actually saw it as dark satire of modern suburban life rather than simply an unending stream of sex jokes.\" In 2007, \"Time\" TV critic James Poniewozik, in ranking the show among the 100 greatest of all time, called it \"a twisted mirror of TV's instant-gratification culture...suitable for a medieval morality play.\" Poniewozik concluded about the characterization of the show: \"Zestily lowbrow and sex-obsessed, \"Married\" was dedicated to the classical ideal that unhappy families were more interesting than happy ones... and a lot funnier.\" Reviewing Sony's original DVD release of the first season in 2003, Aaron Belerle of DVD Talk reflected that the show's humor \"doesn't seem so edgy anymore\".\nIn 1989, Terry Rakolta from Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, attempted to lead a boycott of the show after viewing the episode \"Her Cups Runneth Over\". Offended by the images of an old man wearing a woman's garter and stockings, the scene in which Steve touches the pasties of a mannequin dressed in S&amp;M gear, a homosexual man wearing a tiara on his head (and Al's line \"...and they wonder why we call them 'queens'\"), and a half-nude woman who takes off her bra in front of Al (and is shown with her arms covering her bare chest in the next shot), Rakolta began a letter-writing campaign to advertisers, demanding they boycott the show.\nRakolta's campaign resulted in Gillette, Warner\u2013Lambert, and Coca-Cola ending sponsorships; ironically, Coca-Cola owned the studio that produced the show, Columbia Pictures Television. Fox pulled the episode titled \"I'll See You in Court\" (in which the Bundys attempt to improve their love life by having marital relations in a different setting). This episode became known as the \"Lost Episode\" and was aired on FX on June 18, 2002, with some parts cut. The episode was packaged with the rest of the third season in the January 2005 DVD release (and in the first volume of the \"Married... with Children Most Outrageous Episodes\" DVD set) with the parts cut from syndication restored.\nViewers' curiosity over the boycott and over the show itself led to a drastic ratings boost. Rakolta has been alluded to twice on the show: \"Rock and Roll Girl\", in which a newscaster mentions the city Bloomfield Hills, and \"No Pot to Pease In\", in which a television show is made about the Bundy family and then cancelled because, as Marcy stated, \"some woman in Michigan didn't like it.\"\nSocially conservative criticisms of the show were not limited to Rakolta. The Media Research Center named \"Married... with Children\" the worst show of the 1995\u201396 television season, calling it the \"crudest comedy on prime time television\" for \"lewd punch lines\". Republican U.S. Senator Jesse Helms called the show \"trash\". Fellow Senator Joe Lieberman (D-CT) also strongly criticized the sitcom, after having walked in on his stepson and young daughter watching an episode one evening in late 1993. In an interview many years later, Lieberman would specifically cite \"Married...With Children\" as the impetus for his becoming a vocal opponent of pop culture and the entertainment industry throughout his Senate career.\nHowever, the show was recognized for giving women prominent roles behind the scenes. Producers decided to rewrite the sixth season storyline of Peggy's pregnancy, which coincided with Sagal's actual pregnancy, as a dream that Al had. This was done to prevent Sagal from suffering further trauma by having her character Peggy interact with a new baby, when Sagal's pregnancy ended with her going into premature labor and the baby being stillborn. \nAmanda Bearse (Marcy B. Rhoades/D'Arcy) also became one of the first mainstream actresses to publicly come out as a lesbian, which she did during the series run; she received positive recognition for doing so. \nOn April 22, 2012, Fox re-aired the series premiere in commemoration of its 25th anniversary.\nEpisodes.\nDuring its 11-season run on the Fox network, \"Married... with Children\" aired 258 episodes. A 259th episode, \"I'll See You in Court\" from season 3, never aired on Fox, but premiered on FX and has since been included on DVD and in syndication packages. Three specials also aired following the series' cancellation, including a cast reunion.\nHome media.\nSony Pictures Home Entertainment has released all 11 seasons of \"Married... with Children\" on DVD in Regions 1, 2, and 4. On December 12, 2010, Sony released a complete series set on DVD in Region 1.\nIn December 2007, the Big Bundy Box\u2014a special collection box with all seasons plus new interviews with Sagal and David Faustino\u2014was released. This boxset was released in Australia (Region 4) on November 23, 2009.\nThe Sony DVD box sets from season 3 onward do not feature the original \"Love and Marriage\" theme song in the opening sequence. This was done because Sony was unable to obtain the licensing rights to the song for later sets. Despite this, the end credits on the DVDs for season 3 still include a credit for \"Love and Marriage.\"\nOn August 27, 2013, it was announced that Mill Creek Entertainment had acquired the home media rights to various television series from the Sony Pictures library including \"Married... with Children\" with the original theme song \"Love and Marriage\" sung by Frank Sinatra. They have subsequently re-released the 11 seasons on DVD. The Mill Creek Entertainment version (along with the versions available for streaming and downloading) include scenes that are normally edited in syndication and most of the licensed music that's dubbed over or deleted due to copyright issues. A Complete Series DVD set was re-released on July 7, 2015, in Region 1. All seasons of \"Married... with Children\" are now available for online download and streaming through Amazon, Apple iTunes, Peacock, Hulu, and Vudu.\nMerchandise.\nBooks.\nComic books.\n\"Married... with Children\" was adapted into a comic book series by NOW Comics starting in 1990.\nToys.\nDolls and action figures.\nTwo series (10 in all) of 8\" dolls were produced by Classic TV Toys in 2005 and 2006.\nIn 2018, Funko produced figures of Al, Kelly, Bud and Peggy as a part of their Funko POP! line.\nThat same year, Funko also released a \"Married... with Children\" action figures box set. In 2018 and 2019, Mego released Target exclusives of Al, Peggy and Kelly in 1/9 scale.\nInternational remakes.\nArgentina.\nAn Argentine remake was made by Telefe in 2005, called \"Casados con Hijos\". Two seasons were made (2005 and 2006), totaling 215 episodes and it became a smashing success during the replaying. More than fifteen years after the release, it is still aired on Saturdays at 7:30 pm. The series has been also shown by local channels in Uruguay, Paraguay, and Peru.\nThe character names are: Jos\u00e9 \"Pepe\" Argento (based on Al, played by Guillermo Francella), M\u00f3nica \"Moni\" Argento (based on Peggy, played by Florencia Pe\u00f1a), Paola Argento (based on Kelly, played by Luisana Lopilato), Alfio \"Coqui\" Argento (based on Bud, played by Dar\u00edo Lopilato), Dardo and Mar\u00eda Elena Fuseneco (based on Jefferson D'Arcy, Steve Rhoades and Marcy; played by Marcelo de Bellis and \u00c9rica Rivas).\nArmenia.\nAn Armenian remake was made in 2016, called \"The Azizyans\". The Azizyans is an Armenian sitcom television series developed by Robert Martirosyan and Van Grigoryan. The series premiered on Armenia TV on October 31, 2016. However, the series was not available to the public until Armenia TV started airing the sitcom from October 10, 2017. The series takes place in Yerevan, Armenia. The Azizyans sitcom is starred by Hayk Marutyan. He embodies the character of Garnik Azizyan \u2013 a clothes store seller, who is the only one working in the family. Mrs. Ruzan Azizyan is lazy enough to perform the duties of a housewife.\nThe problems of the father of the family do not bother his 3 children \u2013 his daughter, who is internet-addicted and is active in all social networks; his unemployed eldest son, who is a complete loser, and his youngest son, who is a schoolboy. The roles in this sitcom, created for family watching, are played by Ani Lupe, Satenik Hazaryan, Ishkhan Gharibyan, Suren Arustamyan and other popular Armenian actors. The project is directed by Arman Marutyan. In the second season of the sitcom, the Azizyan family continues to survive thanks to the meager salary of Garnik.\nThe wife of Garnik \u2013 Ruzan, remains in the status of a housewife, without even thinking about finding a job. The elder son of Garnik and Ruzan \u2013 Azat, continues to look for a new job, a young man appears in the life of Marie, who is trying to win the girl's heart. Their younger son Levon, continues to live his own life and does not understand what he has in common with this family. And their neighbors Irina and Alik continue to be friends with the family, which the Azizyans do not quite approve. The only bright spot in the life of the family is their house, which Garnik inherited from his grandfather.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil Rede Bandeirantes made a remake in 1999 with the name \"A Guerra dos Pintos\" (The War of The Pintos). 52 episodes were recorded but only 22 aired before cancelation.\nBulgaria.\nIn Bulgaria a remake is aired from March 26, 2012, with the name \"\u0416\u0435\u043d\u0435\u043d\u0438 \u0441 \u0434\u0435\u0446\u0430 \u0432 \u0411\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0438\u044f\" (Zheneni s detsa v Bulgaria) (Married with children in Bulgaria).\nCroatia.\nIn Croatia a remake called \"Bra\u010dne vode\" was broadcast from September 2008 until November 2009 on Nova TV channel. The characters based on the Bundys were called Zvonimir, Sun\u010dica, Kristina and Boris Bandi\u0107 while the ones based on Marcy and Steve were called Marica and Ivan Kumarica.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, the 1992 remake \"Hilfe, meine Familie spinnt\", broadcast in the prime time, reached double the audience of the original (broadcast in the early fringe time). This, however, was not enough to maintain the series, so it was cancelled after one season with 26 episodes. The remake used the exact translated scripts of the original series (which already substituted localised humour and in-jokes for incomprehensible references to American TV shows not shown in Germany, as well as some totally different jokes) and just renamed places and people according to the new setting. It had a rerun twice on Super RTL in 1996 and 1997.\n\" was aired from March to December 1993 for 26 episodes.\nHungary.\nIn 2006, Hungarian TV network TV2 purchased the license rights including scripts and hired the original producers from Sony Pictures for a remake of the show placed in a Hungarian environment. It was entitled \" (in English: \"Married with children in Budapest\", loan translation: \"A gruesomely decent family in Budapest\"). The main story began with the new family called the B\u00e1ndis inheriting an outskirt house from their American relatives the Bundys. They filmed a whole season of 26 episodes, all of them being remade versions of the plots of the original first seasons. It was the highest budget sitcom ever made in Hungary. First it was aired on Tuesday nights, but was beaten by a new season of \"ER\", then placed to Wednesday nights. The remake lost its viewers, but stayed on the air due to the contract between Sony and TV2. Also the Hungarian critics have strongly condemned the copyright infringement of the original series. They also criticized the lack of quality and the dilettante forcing of the American cliches in Eastern European (Hungarian) environment.\nIsrael.\nThe complete American series aired in Israel in the 1990s, with reruns of it ever since. There has also been an Israeli remake to the show titled \"Nesuim Plus\" (Married Plus) that aired its two seasons from 2012 to 2017.\nMexico.\nIn May 2023, Sony Pictures Television announced a Mexican remake for Sony Channel. The series premiered on 8 May 2024 and stars Adri\u00e1n Uribe and Sandra Echeverr\u00eda.\nRussia.\nThe Original \"Married... With Children\" ran on TV-6 Russia in the late 1990s and early 2000s (before the closing of the channel) in prime-time basis, broadcasting the episodes from seasons 1\u201311. The show later aired on DTV and Domashniy TV. A Russian adaptation, titled \"Happy Together\" (Schastlivy Vmeste; \"Happy Together\"), was broadcast on TNT across the country in 2006.\nThe character names are: Gena Bukin (based on Al, played by Viktor Loginov), Dasha Bukina (based on Peggy, played by Natalya Bochkareva), Sveta Bukina (based on Kelly, played by Darya Sagalova), Roma Bukin (based on Bud, played by Alexander Yakin), Elena and Anatoliy Poleno (based on Marcy and Jefferson D'Arcy, played by Yulia Zaharova and Pavel Savinkov), Evgeniy Stepanov (based on Steve Rhoades, played by Aleksey Sekirin), Sema Bukin (based on Seven, played by Ilya Butkovskiy), and Baron Bukin (based on Buck and Lucky, played by Bayra).\nTurkey.\nA remake was aired in Turkey in 2004 for one season under the name \"Evli ve \u00c7ocuklu\" (Married and with Children), featuring Ege Aydan and Y\u0131ld\u0131z Kaplan in the roles of Niyazi (based on Al) and Jale (based on Peg) Tongu\u00e7. The producer, Med Yap\u0131m, has published 10 episodes on YouTube in 2018.\nUnited Kingdom.\nITV had been screening the original \"Married... with Children\" since 1988. In 1996, the British production company Central Television and Columbia Pictures Television (Columbia TriStar Central Productions) produced a British version called Married for Life, which lasted for one series with seven episodes.\nSpin-offs.\n\"Top of the Heap\" was a sitcom starring Matt LeBlanc. The show was about Vinnie Verducci (played by LeBlanc) and his father Charlie (played by Joseph Bologna) always trying get rich quick schemes. The Verduccis were introduced in an earlier episode where Vinnie dated Kelly Bundy, and Charlie was introduced as an old friend of Al Bundy's. The end of the pilot episode shows Al breaking into their apartment and stealing their TV to replace the one he lost betting on Vinnie in a boxing match. However, the show did not last long and was ultimately cancelled. It had its own spin-off/sequel called \"Vinnie &amp; Bobby\" a year later, which was also cancelled.\nAlso, an attempt was made to make a spin-off out of David Garrison's Steve Rhoades character which took place on Bud's Trumaine University. The spin-off was called \"Radio Free Trumaine\" where Garrison played the Dean. \"Enemies\" was another spin-off, but played to be a spoof on the TV series \"Friends\". Meanwhile, a proposed series focusing on the NO MA'AM group without Al Bundy was outright rejected by Fox over fears of misogyny.\nOn September 11, 2014, it was announced that a spin-off was in the works, centered on the character of Bud Bundy. Ed O'Neill revealed plot details for the proposed spin-off in 2016: \"Bud is now grown up and living in the old house with some of his buddies, but they're all bust-outs, they aren't working. His ex-wife is living in one of the bedrooms with Bud's best friend [...] Peg and Al are retired and living in Vegas; they won the lottery.\"\nReunions.\nThe cast of \"Married... with Children\" has remained close-knit since the show's conclusion, making public appearances together as well as taking part in each other's various projects. In 2003, the cast reunited to share their memories of making the show for the one-hour televised reunion special, \"Married with Children Reunion Special\". \n2026 reunion.\nOn October 28, 2025, it was announced that Ed O'Neill, Katey Sagal, Christina Applegate, and David Faustino would reunite live on stage for \"An Evening with The Bundys: The Married with Children Cast Reunion\" at the Wiltern Theatre in Los Angeles on January 28, 2026. A portion of the ticket sales will go to the multiple sclerosis organization Race to Erase MS.\nAnimated revival.\nOn May 13, 2022, \"Deadline\" reported that an animated revival of the series was currently in the works with the original cast attached to return. It was further revealed that Sony Pictures Television had been working on the animated series for over a year and waited until they had closed deals with the cast before presenting it to networks and streamers. It was felt that an animated revival worked best due to the original cast's busy schedule. Applegate confirmed in a 2023 \"Vanity Fair\" interview that she, O'Neill, Sagal, and Faustino remained attached to the revival and were just waiting.\nA sample clip of the animated series leaked onto the internet on May 14, 2024, along with a synopsis and presentation web site.\nIn July 2025, it was confirmed that the animated revival was no longer in development.\nMemoir.\nIn April 2024, a memoir, \"Married... with Children vs. the World\", written by \"Married... with Children\" writer and producer Richard Gurman, was published by Permuted Press. In it, Gurman gives a behind-the-scenes look at the creation of the show and his time working on it. The show's cast also contributed to the book.\nAmerican syndication and international airings.\nDistributed by Columbia Pictures Television Distribution, later Sony Pictures Television since 2002, \"Married... with Children\" debuted in off-network syndication in the fall of 1991. The series later began airing on cable on FX from September 1999 until September 2008. In June 2002, FX became the first television network to air the controversial, previously banned episode \"I'll See You in Court\", albeit in an edited format. The full version of \"I'll See You in Court\" can only be seen on the DVD release \"Married... with Children: The Most Outrageous Episodes Volume 1\" and the Mill Creek Entertainment complete series collection. The version found on the Third Season DVD set under Sony is the edited-for-TV version. In 2008, the Spike network reportedly paid US$12 million for broadcast rights to every episode including the unedited version of the infamous episode \"I'll See You in Court\".\nFollowing its acquisition by Nexstar Media Group and rebrand to NewsNation, the network indicated it would start rolling off its non-news programming as those contracts expire to expand news coverage. In November 2018, the entire 11-season run became available to watch through Hulu. On September 17, 2018, GetTV began airing the show and continued until around 2020 or 2021. In July 2024, Cozi TV acquired the rights to the show along with \"The King of Queens\" and began airing on August 5, 2024.\n\"Married...with Children\" has also been a ratings success in other countries around the world.\nLocations.\nThe opening footage comprises views of Chicago, opening with a shot of Buckingham Fountain in Grant Park. The aerial downtown shot was taken from the Lake Shore Drive section north of the Loop. The expressway entrance shot was taken from the 1983 movie \"National Lampoon's Vacation\" featuring the Griswolds' green family truckster with a northeastward view of the Dan Ryan/Stevenson junction southwest of the Loop. The exterior shot used for the Bundys' house was taken in a subdivision in Deerfield, Illinois. Non-English versions might differ, e.g. the dubbed German version always includes the expressway shot.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18944", "revid": "40764242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18944", "title": "Methodological naturalism", "text": ""}
{"id": "18947", "revid": "636570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18947", "title": "Metre", "text": "SI unit of length\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe metre (or meter in US spelling; symbol: m) is the base unit of length in the International System of Units (SI). Since 2019, the metre has been defined as the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum during a time interval of of a second, where the second is defined by a hyperfine transition frequency of caesium.\nThe metre was originally defined in 1791 by the French National Assembly as one ten-millionth of the distance from the equator to the North Pole along a great circle, so the Earth's polar circumference is approximately .\nIn 1799, the metre was redefined in terms of a prototype metre bar. The bar used was changed in 1889, and in 1960 the metre was redefined in terms of a certain number of wavelengths of a certain emission line of krypton-86. The current definition was adopted in 1983 and modified slightly in 2002 to clarify that the metre is a measure of proper length. From 1983 until 2019, the metre was formally defined as the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum in of a second. After the 2019 revision of the SI, this definition was rephrased to include the definition of a second in terms of the caesium frequency \u0394\"\u03bd\"Cs. This series of amendments did not alter the size of the metre significantly \u2013 today Earth's polar circumference measures , a change of about 200 parts per million from the original value of exactly , which also includes improvements in the accuracy of measuring the circumference.\nSpelling.\n\"Metre\" is the standard spelling of the metric unit for length in nearly all English-speaking nations, the exceptions being the United States and the Philippines which use \"meter\".\nMeasuring devices (such as ammeter, speedometer) are spelled \"-meter\" in all variants of English. The suffix \"-meter\" has the same Greek origin as the unit of length.\nEtymology.\nThe etymological roots of \"metre\" can be traced to the Greek verb () ((I) measure, count or compare) and noun () (a measure), which were used for physical measurement, for poetic metre and by extension for moderation or avoiding extremism (as in \"be measured in your response\"). This range of uses is also found in Latin (), French (), English and other languages. The Greek word is derived from the Proto-Indo-European root \"*meh\u2081-\" 'to measure'. The motto () on the seal of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) was approved by Adolphe Hirsch on 11 July 1875 and may be translated as \"Keep the measure\"; it thus calls for both measurement and moderation. In English, the use of the word \"metre\" (for the French unit ) began at least as early as 1797.\nHistory of definition.\nIn May 2025, the 150th anniversary of the Metre Convention was celebrated with events in Paris and Versailles, organised by the BIPM and the French government. The celebrations highlighted the long-standing international cooperation in metrology under the theme \u201cMeasurements for all times, for all people.\u201d\nSI prefixed forms of metre.\nSI prefixes can be used to denote decimal multiples and submultiples of the metre, as shown in the table below. Long distances are usually expressed in km, astronomical units (149.6\u00a0Gm), light-years (10\u00a0Pm), or parsecs (31\u00a0Pm), rather than in Mm or larger multiples; \"30\u00a0cm\", \"30\u00a0m\", and \"300\u00a0m\" are more common than \"3\u00a0dm\", \"3\u00a0dam\", and \"3\u00a0hm\", respectively.\nThe terms \"micron\" and \"millimicron\" have been used instead of \"micrometre\" (\u03bcm) and \"nanometre\" (nm), respectively, but this practice is discouraged.\nEquivalents in other units.\nWithin this table, \"inch\" and \"yard\" mean \"international inch\" and \"international yard\" respectively, though approximate conversions in the left column hold for both international and survey units.\n \"\u2248\" means \"is approximately equal to\";\n \"=\" means \"is exactly equal to\".\nOne metre is exactly equivalent to \u00a0inches and to \u00a0yards.\nA simple mnemonic to assist with conversion is \"three 3s\": 1\u00a0metre is nearly equivalent to 3\u00a0feet &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+3\u20448\u00a0inches. This gives an overestimate of 0.125\u00a0mm.\nThe ancient Egyptian cubit was about 0.5\u00a0m (surviving rods are 523\u2013529\u00a0mm). Scottish and English definitions of the ell (2\u00a0cubits) were 941\u00a0mm (0.941\u00a0m) and 1143\u00a0mm (1.143\u00a0m) respectively. The ancient Parisian \"toise\" (fathom) was slightly shorter than 2\u00a0m and was standardised at exactly 2\u00a0m in the mesures usuelles system, such that 1\u00a0m was exactly &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442\u00a0toise. The Russian verst was 1.0668\u00a0km. The Swedish mil was 10.688\u00a0km, but was changed to 10\u00a0km when Sweden converted to metric units.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18948", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18948", "title": "Mole", "text": "Mole (or Mol\u00e9) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18953", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18953", "title": "Meter", "text": ""}
{"id": "18955", "revid": "2153309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18955", "title": "Mentha", "text": "Genus of flowering plants in the family Lamiaceae\nMentha, also known as mint (from Greek , Linear B \"mi-ta\"), is a genus of flowering plants in the mint family, Lamiaceae. It is estimated that 13 to 24 species exist, but the exact distinction between species is unclear. Hybridization occurs naturally where some species' ranges overlap. Many hybrids and cultivars are known.\nThe genus has a subcosmopolitan distribution, growing best in wet environments and moist soils.\nDescription.\nMints are aromatic, almost exclusively perennial herbs. They have wide-spreading underground and overground stolons and erect, square, branched stems. Mints will grow tall and can spread over an indeterminate area. Due to their tendency to spread unchecked, some mints are considered invasive.\nThe leaves are arranged in opposite pairs, from oblong to lanceolate, often downy, and with a serrated margin. Leaf colours range from dark green and gray-green to purple, blue, and sometimes pale yellow.\nThe flowers are produced in long bracts from leaf axils. They are white to purple and produced in false whorls called verticillasters. The corolla is two-lipped with four subequal lobes, the upper lobe usually the largest. The fruit is a nutlet, containing one to four seeds.\nTaxonomy.\n\"Mentha\" is a member of the tribe Mentheae in the subfamily Nepetoideae. The tribe contains about 65 genera, and relationships within it remain obscure. Authors have disagreed on the circumscription of \"Mentha\". For example, \"M.\u00a0cervina\" has been placed in \"Pulegium\" and \"Preslia\", and \"M.\u00a0cunninghamii\" has been placed in \"Micromeria\". In 2004, a molecular phylogenetic study indicated that both \"M. cervina\" and \"M. cunninghamii\" should be included in \"Mentha\". However, \"M. cunninghamii\" was excluded in a 2007 treatment of the genus.\nMore than 3,000 names have been published in the genus \"Mentha\", at ranks from species to forms, the majority of which are regarded as synonyms or illegitimate names. The taxonomy of the genus is made difficult because many species hybridize readily, or are themselves derived from possibly ancient hybridization events. Seeds from hybrids give rise to variable offspring, which may spread through vegetative propagation. The variability has led to what has been described as \"paroxysms of species and subspecific taxa\"; for example, one taxonomist published 434 new mint taxa for central Europe alone between 1911 and 1916. Recent sources recognize between 18 and 24 species.\nSpecies.\nAs of November\u00a02025[ [update]], Plants of the World Online recognized the following species:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHybrids.\nThe mint genus has a large grouping of recognized hybrids. Those accepted by Plants of the World Online are listed below. Parent species are taken from Tucker &amp; Naczi (2007). Synonyms, along with cultivars and varieties where available, are included within the specific nothospecies.\nCommon names and cultivars.\nThere are hundreds of common English names for species and cultivars of \"Mentha\". These include:\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe genus has a subcosmopolitan distribution across Europe, Africa \u2013 (Southern Africa), Asia, Australia \u2013 Oceania, North America and South America. Its species can be found in many environments, but most grow best in wet environments and moist soils.\nEcology.\nMints are used as food by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species, including buff ermine moths, and by beetles, such as \"Chrysolina coerulans\" (blue mint beetle) and \"C. herbacea\" (mint leaf beetle).\nCultivation.\nAll mints thrive near pools of water, lakes, rivers, and cool moist spots in partial shade. In general, mints tolerate a wide range of conditions, and can also be grown in full sun. Mint grows all year round.\nThey are fast-growing, extending their reach along surfaces through a network of runners. Due to their speedy growth, one plant of each desired mint, along with a little care, will provide more than enough mint for home use. Some mint species are more invasive than others. Even with the less invasive mints, care should be taken when mixing any mint with any other plants, lest the mint take over. To control mints in an open environment, they should be planted in deep, bottomless containers sunk in the ground, or planted above ground in tubs and barrels.\nSome mints can be propagated by seed, but growth from seed can be an unreliable method for raising mint for two reasons: mint seeds are highly variable (i.e. one might not end up with what was supposedly planted) and some mint varieties are sterile. It is more effective to take and plant cuttings from the runners of healthy mints.\nThe most common and popular mints for commercial cultivation are peppermint (\"Mentha \u00d7 piperita\"), native spearmint (\"Mentha spicata\"), Scotch spearmint (\"Mentha x gracilis\"), and cornmint (\"Mentha arvensis\"); also (more recently) apple mint (\"Mentha suaveolens\").\nMints are supposed to make good companion plants, repelling insect pests and attracting beneficial ones. They are susceptible to whitefly and aphids.\nHarvesting of mint leaves can be done at any time. Fresh leaves should be used immediately or stored up to a few days in plastic bags in a refrigerator. Optionally, leaves can be frozen in ice cube trays. Dried mint leaves should be stored in an airtight container placed in a cool, dark, dry area.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nThe leaf, fresh or dried, is the culinary source of mint. Fresh mint is usually preferred over dried mint when storage of the mint is not a problem. The leaves have a warm, fresh, aromatic, sweet flavor with a cool aftertaste, and are used in teas, syrups, candies, ice creams, sweet foods, beverages, jellies and sauces. In Middle Eastern cuisine, mint is used in lamb dishes, while in British cuisine and American cuisine, mint sauce and mint jelly are used, respectively. Mint (pudina) is a staple in Indian cuisine, used for flavouring curries and other dishes.\nMint is a necessary ingredient in Touareg tea, a popular tea in northern African and Arab countries. Alcoholic drinks sometimes feature mint for flavor or garnish, such as the mint julep and the mojito. \"Cr\u00e8me de menthe\" is a mint-flavored liqueur used in drinks such as the grasshopper.\nMint essential oil and menthol are extensively used as flavorings in breath fresheners, drinks, antiseptic mouth rinses, toothpaste, chewing gum, desserts, and candies, such as mint (candy) and mint chocolate. The substances that give the mints their characteristic aromas and flavors are menthol (the main aroma of peppermint and Japanese peppermint) and pulegone (in pennyroyal and Corsican mint). The compound primarily responsible for the aroma and flavor of spearmint is -carvone.\nTraditional medicine and cosmetics.\nThe ancient Greeks rubbed mint on their arms, believing it would make them stronger. Mint was originally used as a medicinal herb to treat stomach ache and chest pains. There are several uses in traditional medicine and preliminary research for possible use of peppermint in treating irritable bowel syndrome.\nMenthol from mint essential oil (40\u201390%) is an ingredient of many cosmetics and some perfumes. Menthol and mint essential oil are also used in aromatherapy which may have clinical use to alleviate post-surgery nausea.\nAllergic reaction.\nAlthough it is used in many consumer products, mint may cause allergic reactions in some people, inducing symptoms such as abdominal cramps, diarrhea, headaches, heartburn, tingling or numbing around the mouth, anaphylaxis, or contact dermatitis.\nInsecticides.\nMint oil is also used as an environmentally friendly insecticide for its ability to kill some common pests such as wasps, hornets, ants, and cockroaches.\nRoom scent and aromatherapy.\nKnown in Greek mythology as the herb of hospitality, one of mint's first known uses in Europe was as a room deodorizer. The herb was strewn across floors to cover the smell of the hard-packed soil. Stepping on the mint helped to spread its scent through the room. Today, it is more commonly used for aromatherapy through the use of essential oils.\nEtymology of \"mint\".\nThe word \"mint\" descends from the Latin word \"mentha\" or \"menta\", which is rooted in the Greek words \"mintha\", \"minth\u0113\" or \u00a0\"mint\u0113\" meaning \"spearmint\". The plant was personified in Greek mythology as Minthe, a nymph who was beloved by Hades and was transformed into a mint plant by either Persephone or Demeter. \nReferences to \"mint leaves\", without a qualifier like \"peppermint\" or \"apple mint\", generally refer to spearmint leaves.\nIn Spain and Central and South America, mint is known as \"menta\". In Lusophone countries, especially in Portugal, mint species are popularly known as \"\". In many Indo-Aryan languages, it is called \"pud\u012bna\": , , , borrowed from Persian \"pudna\" or \"puna\" meaning \"pennyroyal\".\nThe taxonomic family Lamiaceae is known as the mint family. It includes many other aromatic herbs, including most of the more common cooking herbs, such as basil, rosemary, sage, oregano, and catnip.\nAs an English colloquial term, any small mint-flavored confectionery item can be called a mint.\nOther plants called \"mint\".\nThere are a number of plants that have mint in the common English name but which do not belong to the genus \"Mentha\":\nFossil record.\n\"Mentha pliocenica\" fossil seeds have been excavated in Pliocene deposits of Dvorets on the right bank of the Dnieper river between the cities of Rechitsa and Loyew, in south-eastern Belarus. The fossil seeds are similar to the seeds of \"Mentha aquatica\" and \"Mentha arvensis\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18956", "revid": "89105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18956", "title": "Marjoram", "text": "Perennial herb\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMarjoram (, Origanum majorana) is a cold-sensitive perennial herb or undershrub with sweet pine and citrus flavours. In some Middle Eastern countries, marjoram is synonymous with oregano, and there the names sweet marjoram and knotted marjoram are used to distinguish it from other plants of the genus \"Origanum\". It is also called pot marjoram, although this name is also used for other cultivated species of \"Origanum\".\nHistory.\nMarjoram is indigenous to Cyprus, the Mediterranean, Turkey, Western Asia, the Arabian Peninsula, and the Levant, and was known to the ancient Greeks and Romans as a symbol of happiness. It may have spread to the British Isles during the Middle Ages. Marjoram was not widely used in the United States until after World War II.\nThe name marjoram (Old French: \"majorane\"; ) does not directly derive from the Latin word (major).\nMarjoram is related to Samhain, the Celtic pagan holiday that would eventually become Halloween. It has also been used in Sephardi Jewish tradition as a ritual medical practice. Ancient Greeks believed the plant was created by Aphrodite. In one myth, the royal perfumer of Cyprus, Amaracus, was transformed into marjoram. To the Romans the herb was known as the herb of happiness, and was believed to increase lifespan. Marjoram is mentioned in De Materia Medica by Pedanius Dioscorides, and was used by Hippocrates as an antiseptic.\nDescription.\nLeaves are smooth, simple, petiolated, ovate to oblong-ovate, long, wide, with obtuse apex, entire margin, symmetrical but tapering base, and reticulate venation. The texture of the leaf is extremely smooth due to the presence of numerous hairs. Its flowers can be white, pink to red, or blue to purple.\nCultivation.\nConsidered a tender perennial (USDA Zones 7\u20139), marjoram can sometimes prove hardy even in zone 5. Under proper conditions it spreads prolifically, and so is usually grown in pots to prevent it from taking over a garden.\nMarjoram is cultivated for its aromatic leaves, either green or dry, for culinary purposes; the tops are cut as the plants begin to flower and are dried slowly in the shade. It is often used in herb combinations such as \"herbes de Provence\" and \"za'atar\". The flowering leaves and tops of marjoram are steam-distilled to produce an essential oil that is yellowish (darkening to brown as it ages). It has many chemical components, some of which are borneol, camphor, and pinene.\nRelated species.\nOregano (\"Origanum vulgare\"), sometimes listed with marjoram as \"O. majorana\", is also called wild marjoram. It is a perennial common in southern Europe and north to Sweden in dry copses and on hedge-banks, with many stout stems high, bearing short-stalked, somewhat ovate leaves and clusters of purple flowers. It has a stronger flavor than marjoram.\nPot marjoram or Cretan oregano (\"O. onites\") has similar uses to marjoram.\nHardy marjoram or French/&lt;wbr /&gt;Italian/&lt;wbr /&gt;Sicilian marjoram (\"O. \u00d7 majoricum\"), a cross of marjoram with oregano, is much more resistant to cold, but is slightly less sweet.\n\"O. \u00d7 hybridum\" is known as showy marjoram or showy oregano.\nUses.\nMarjoram is used for seasoning lamb and vegetable dishes, soups, stews, salad dressings, sauces, herbal teas, and sausages. Its flavor resembles that of oregano.\nMarjoram has long been used as a medicinal herb. Marjoram or marjoram oil has been used to treat cancer, colds, coughs, cramps, depression, ear infections, gastrointestinal problems, headaches, and paralysis, as well as arthritis, chest congestion, muscle aches, and as a diuretic. It has also been used as an aphrodisiac, mouthwash, tea, and in poultices, tinctures, and infusions. Though not all of its historic uses are scientifically backed, the plant has verifiable medical use. For example, it contains the phenol carvacrol, which is antibacterial, antifungal and antimicrobial. Ethanol extract is cytotoxic against fibrosarcoma cell lines, ethyl acetate extract has antiproliferative properties against PER.C6 and HeLa cells, as have hesperetin and hydroquinone, which can be isolated from marjoram extract. Cardioprotective, hepatoprotective, antiulcerogenetic, anticholinesterase, anti-polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), and anti-inflammatory effects were also found in dried marjoram, marjoram tea, or in compounds extracted from marjoram. Marjoram is generally not toxic, but should not be used by pregnant or lactating women. However, it is always important to be cautious and consult a doctor when using medical herbs.\nSymbolism.\nIt is used by the clown Lavatch in \"All's Well That Ends Well\" (IV.5) to describe Helena and his regret at her apparent death: \n\"she was the sweet marjoram of the salad, or rather, the herb of grace.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18957", "revid": "765510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18957", "title": "Medicine", "text": "Diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of illness\nMedicine is the science and practice of caring for patients, managing the diagnosis, prognosis, prevention, treatment, palliation of their injury or disease, and promoting their health. Medicine encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness. Contemporary medicine applies biomedical sciences, biomedical research, genetics, and medical technology to diagnose, treat, and prevent injury and disease, typically through pharmaceuticals or surgery, but also through therapies as diverse as psychotherapy, external splints and traction, medical devices, biologics, and ionizing radiation, amongst others.\nMedicine has been practiced since prehistoric times, and for most of this time it was an art (an area of creativity and skill), frequently having connections to the religious and philosophical beliefs of local culture. For example, a medicine man would apply herbs and say prayers for healing, or an ancient philosopher and physician would apply bloodletting according to the theories of humorism. In recent centuries, since the advent of modern science, most medicine has become a combination of art and science (both basic and applied, under the umbrella of medical science). For example, while stitching technique for sutures is an art learned through practice, knowledge of what happens at the cellular and molecular level in the tissues being stitched arises through science.\nPrescientific forms of medicine, now known as traditional medicine or \"folk medicine\", remain commonly used in the absence of scientific medicine and are thus called alternative medicine. Alternative treatments outside of scientific medicine with ethical, safety and efficacy concerns are termed quackery.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nMedicine (, ) is the science and practice of the diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, and prevention of disease. The word \"medicine\" is derived from Latin , meaning \"a physician\". The word \"physic\" itself, from which \"physician\" derives, was the old word for what is now called a medicine, and also the field of medicine.\nClinical practice.\nMedical availability and clinical practice vary across the world due to regional differences in culture and technology. Modern scientific medicine is highly developed and widespread in the Western world, while in developing countries such as parts of Africa or Asia, the population may rely more heavily on traditional medicine which has limited evidence and efficacy and no required formal training for practitioners.\nIn the developed world, evidence-based medicine is not universally used in clinical practice; for example, a 2007 survey of literature reviews found that about 49% of the interventions lacked sufficient evidence to support either benefit or harm.\nIn modern clinical practice, physicians and mid-level practitioners such as physician assistants personally assess patients to diagnose, prognose, treat, and prevent disease using clinical judgment. An initial medical encounter with a patient typically begins with a review of the patient's medical history and medical record, followed by a medical interview and a physical examination. Basic diagnostic medical devices (e.g., stethoscope, tongue depressor) are typically used. After examining for signs and interviewing for symptoms, the doctor may order medical tests (e.g., blood tests), take a biopsy, or prescribe pharmaceutical drugs or other therapies. Differential diagnosis methods help to rule out conditions based on the information provided. During the encounter, properly informing the patient of all relevant facts is an important part of the relationship and the development of trust within the context of the doctor-patient relationship. The medical encounter is then documented in the medical record, which is a legal document in many jurisdictions. Follow-up encounters may be shorter but follow the same general procedure, and specialists follow a similar process. The diagnosis and treatment may take only a few minutes or a few weeks, depending on the complexity of the issue.\nThe components of the medical interview and encounter are:\nThe physical examination is the examination of the patient for medical signs of disease that are objective and observable, in contrast to symptoms that are volunteered by the patient and are not necessarily objectively observable. The healthcare provider uses sight, hearing, touch, and sometimes smell (e.g., in infection, uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis). Four actions are the basis of physical examination: inspection, palpation (feel), percussion (tap to determine resonance characteristics), and auscultation (listen), generally in that order, although auscultation occurs prior to percussion and palpation for abdominal assessments.\nThe clinical examination involves the study of:\nIt is to likely focus on areas of interest highlighted in the medical history and may not include everything listed above.\nThe treatment plan may include ordering additional medical laboratory tests and medical imaging studies, starting therapy, referral to a specialist, or watchful observation. A follow-up may be advised. Depending upon the health insurance plan and the managed care system, various forms of \"utilization review\", such as prior authorization of tests, may place barriers on accessing expensive services.\nThe medical decision-making (MDM) process includes the analysis and synthesis of all the above data to come up with a list of possible diagnoses (the differential diagnoses), along with an idea of what needs to be done to obtain a definitive diagnosis that would explain the patient's problem.\nOn subsequent visits, the process may be repeated in an abbreviated manner to obtain any new history, symptoms, physical findings, lab or imaging results, or specialist consultations.\nInstitutions.\nContemporary medicine is, in general, conducted within health care systems. Legal, credentialing, and financing frameworks are established by individual governments, augmented on occasion by international organizations, such as churches. The characteristics of any given health care system have a significant impact on the way medical care is provided.\nFrom ancient times, Christian emphasis on practical charity gave rise to the development of systematic nursing and hospitals, and the Catholic Church today remains the largest non-government provider of medical services in the world. Advanced industrial countries (with the exception of the United States) and many developing countries provide medical services through a system of universal health care that aims to guarantee care for all through a single-payer health care system or compulsory private or cooperative health insurance. This is intended to ensure that the entire population has access to medical care on the basis of need rather than ability to pay. Delivery may be via private medical practices, state-owned hospitals and clinics, or charities, most commonly a combination of all three.\nMost tribal societies provide no guarantee of healthcare for the population as a whole. In such societies, healthcare is available to those who can afford to pay for it, have self-insured it (either directly or as part of an employment contract), or may be covered by care financed directly by the government or tribe.\nTransparency of information is another factor defining a delivery system. Access to information on conditions, treatments, quality, and pricing greatly affects the choice of patients/consumers and, therefore, the incentives of medical professionals. While the US healthcare system has come under fire for its lack of openness, new legislation may encourage greater openness. There is a perceived tension between the need for transparency on the one hand and such issues as patient confidentiality and the possible exploitation of information for commercial gain on the other.\nThe health professionals who provide care in medicine comprise multiple professions, such as medics, nurses, physiotherapists, and psychologists. These professions will have their own ethical standards, professional education, and bodies. The medical profession has been conceptualized from a sociological perspective.\nDelivery.\nProvision of medical care is classified into primary, secondary, and tertiary care categories.\nPrimary care medical services are provided by physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, or other health professionals who have first contact with a patient seeking medical treatment or care. These occur in physician offices, medical practices, clinics, nursing homes, schools, patients' homes, and in other places that are typically geographically close to where patients live, work or study. About 90% of medical visits can be satisfactorily and effectively dealt with by primary care provider(s). Primary care visits might include treatment of minor, acute or chronic illnesses, preventive care, and health education. Primary care is directed to the health of entire populations and thus providers care for patients of all ages and sexes.\nSecondary care medical services are provided by medical specialists in their offices, practices or clinics, or at local community hospitals, to patients referred by the primary care provider who first diagnosed or treated the patient. 'Referrals' are made of those patients who required the particular expertise of, or specific procedures performed by, specialists. Secondary care services include both ambulatory care and inpatient services, emergency departments, some intensive care medicine, some surgeries and related services, physical therapy, labor and delivery, endoscopy units, diagnostic laboratory and medical imaging services, hospice centers, and others depending on the health services systems within which the care is being delivered. Some primary care providers may also take care of hospitalized patients and deliver babies in a secondary care setting.\nTertiary care medical services are provided by specialist teams of providers in larger, more specialised hospitals or regional medical centers, which are equipped with diagnostic and treatment facilities not typically available at local (often smaller) hospitals. This allows for the treatment and care of patients with more complex or urgent or serious medical conditions, which in turn may require more expertise (including multi-disciplinary teams) and resources (facilities, staff, bed days) to effectively treat. Tertiary care may include that provided at burn treatment or trauma centers, advanced neonatology unit services, organ transplants, high-risk pregnancy and child delivery, radiation oncology, and very many other forms of specialist and intensive care.\nModern medical care also depends on the keeping and use of information, including about a particular patient\u2014still kept in many health care settings on paper 'medical records', but increasingly nowadays by electronic means.\nIn low-income countries, modern healthcare is often too expensive for the average person. International healthcare policy researchers have advocated that \"user fees\" be removed in these areas to ensure access; however, even with removal of patient fee obligations, significant costs and barriers remain for the poor and the sick in accessing sufficient care.\nSeparation of prescribing and dispensing is a practice in medicine and pharmacy in which the physician who provides a medical prescription is different from the pharmacist who provides the prescription drug to the patient. In the Western world there are centuries of tradition and practice differentiating pharmacists from physicians, and two quite separate professions developed. In many Asian countries, on the other hand, it is traditional for physicians to also deliver drugs directly to patients, at least in some cases. This model is also being used increasingly in the west: especially for simply-treated conditions (eg, those needing general antibiotics), in remote locations, with vulnerable communities of patients, and in small or integrated medical facilities. \nBranches.\nWorking together as an interdisciplinary team, many highly trained health professionals besides medical practitioners are involved in the delivery of modern health care. Examples include: nurses, emergency medical technicians and paramedics, laboratory scientists, pharmacists, podiatrists, physiotherapists, respiratory therapists, speech therapists, occupational therapists, radiographers, dietitians, and bioengineers, medical physicists, surgeons, surgeon's assistant, surgical technologist.\nThe scope and sciences underpinning human medicine overlap many other fields. A patient admitted to the hospital is usually under the care of a specific team based on their main presenting problem, e.g., the cardiology team, who then may interact with other specialties, e.g., surgical, radiology, to help diagnose or treat the main problem or any subsequent complications/developments.\nPhysicians have many specializations and subspecializations into certain branches of medicine, which are listed below. There are variations from country to country regarding which specialties certain subspecialties are in.\nThe main branches of medicine are:\nSpecialties.\nIn the broadest meaning of \"medicine\", there are many different specialties. In the UK, most specialities have their own body or college, which has its own entrance examination. These are collectively known as the Royal Colleges, although not all currently use the term \"Royal\". The development of a speciality is often driven by new technology (such as the development of effective anaesthetics) or ways of working (such as emergency departments); the new specialty leads to the formation of a unifying body of doctors and the prestige of administering their own examination.\nWithin medical circles, specialities usually fit into one of two broad categories: \"Medicine\" and \"Surgery\". \"Medicine\" refers to the practice of non-operative medicine, and most of its subspecialties require preliminary training in Internal Medicine. In the UK, this was traditionally evidenced by passing the examination for the Membership of the Royal College of Physicians (MRCP) or the equivalent college in Scotland or Ireland. \"Surgery\" refers to the practice of operative medicine, and most subspecialties in this area require preliminary training in General Surgery, which in the UK leads to membership of the Royal College of Surgeons of England (MRCS). At present, some specialties of medicine do not fit easily into either of these categories, such as radiology, pathology, or anesthesia. Most of these have branched from one or other of the two camps above; for example anaesthesia developed first as a faculty of the Royal College of Surgeons (for which MRCS/FRCS would have been required) before becoming the Royal College of Anaesthetists and membership of the college is attained by sitting for the examination of the Fellowship of the Royal College of Anesthetists (FRCA).\nSurgical specialty.\n\"Surgery\" is an ancient medical specialty that uses operative manual and instrumental techniques on a patient to investigate or treat a pathological condition such as disease or injury, to help improve bodily function or appearance or to repair unwanted ruptured areas (for example, a perforated ear drum). Surgeons must also manage pre-operative, post-operative, and potential surgical candidates on the hospital wards. In some centers, anesthesiology is part of the division of surgery (for historical and logistical reasons), although it is not a surgical discipline. Other medical specialties may employ surgical procedures, such as ophthalmology and dermatology, but are not considered surgical sub-specialties per se.\nSurgical training in the U.S. requires a minimum of five years of residency after medical school. Sub-specialties of surgery often require seven or more years. In addition, fellowships can last an additional one to three years. Because post-residency fellowships can be competitive, many trainees devote two additional years to research. Thus in some cases surgical training will not finish until more than a decade after medical school. Furthermore, surgical training can be very difficult and time-consuming.\nSurgical subspecialties include those a physician may specialize in after undergoing general surgery residency training as well as several surgical fields with separate residency training. Surgical subspecialties that one may pursue following general surgery residency training: \"\"\nOther surgical specialties within medicine with their own individual residency training:\nInternal medicine specialty.\nInternal medicine is the medical specialty dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of adult diseases. According to some sources, an emphasis on internal structures is implied. In North America, specialists in internal medicine are commonly called \"internists\". Elsewhere, especially in Commonwealth nations, such specialists are often called physicians. These terms, \"internist\" or \"physician\" (in the narrow sense, common outside North America), generally exclude practitioners of gynecology and obstetrics, pathology, psychiatry, and especially surgery and its subspecialities.\nBecause their patients are often seriously ill or require complex investigations, internists do much of their work in hospitals. Formerly, many internists were not subspecialized; such \"general physicians\" would see any complex nonsurgical problem; this style of practice has become much less common. In modern urban practice, most internists are subspecialists: that is, they generally limit their medical practice to problems of one organ system or to one particular area of medical knowledge. For example, gastroenterologists and nephrologists specialize respectively in diseases of the gut and the kidneys.\nIn the Commonwealth of Nations and some other countries, specialist pediatricians and geriatricians are also described as \"specialist physicians\" (or internists) who have subspecialized by age of patient rather than by organ system. Elsewhere, especially in North America, general pediatrics is often a form of primary care.\nThere are many subspecialities (or subdisciplines) of internal medicine:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n*\"Angiology/Vascular Medicine\"\n*\"Bariatrics\"\n*\"Cardiology\"\n*\"Critical care medicine\"\n*\"Endocrinology\"\n*\"Gastroenterology\"\n*\"Geriatrics\"\n*\"Hematology\"\n*\"Hepatology\"\n*\"Infectious disease\"\n*\"Nephrology\"\n*\"Neurology\"\n*\"Oncology\"\n*\"Pediatrics\"\n*\"Pulmonology/Pneumology/Respirology/chest medicine\"\n*\"Rheumatology\"\n*\"Sports Medicine\"\nTraining in internal medicine (as opposed to surgical training), varies considerably across the world: see the articles on \"medical education\" for more details. In North America, it requires at least three years of residency training after medical school, which can then be followed by a one- to three-year fellowship in the subspecialties listed above. In general, resident work hours in medicine are less than those in surgery, averaging about 60 hours per week in the US. This difference does not apply in the UK where all doctors are now required by law to work less than 48 hours per week on average.\nOther major specialties.\nThe following are some major medical specialties that do not directly fit into any of the above-mentioned groups:\nInterdisciplinary fields.\nSome interdisciplinary sub-specialties of medicine include:\nEducation and legal controls.\nMedical education and training varies around the world. It typically involves entry level education at a university medical school, followed by a period of supervised practice or internship, or residency. This can be followed by postgraduate vocational training. A variety of teaching methods have been employed in medical education, still itself a focus of active research. In Canada and the United States of America, a Doctor of Medicine degree, often abbreviated M.D., or a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree, often abbreviated as D.O. and unique to the United States, must be completed in and delivered from a recognized university.\nSince knowledge, techniques, and medical technology continue to evolve at a rapid rate, many regulatory authorities require continuing medical education. Medical practitioners upgrade their knowledge in various ways, including medical journals, seminars, conferences, and online programs. A database of objectives covering medical knowledge, as suggested by national societies across the United States, can be searched at http://data.medobjectives.marian.edu/ .\nIn most countries, it is a legal requirement for a medical doctor to be licensed or registered. In general, this entails a medical degree from a university and accreditation by a medical board or an equivalent national organization, which may ask the applicant to pass exams. This restricts the considerable legal authority of the medical profession to physicians that are trained and qualified by national standards. It is also intended as an assurance to patients and as a safeguard against charlatans that practice inadequate medicine for personal gain. While the laws generally require medical doctors to be trained in \"evidence based\", Western, or Hippocratic Medicine, they are not intended to discourage different paradigms of health.\nIn the European Union, the profession of doctor of medicine is regulated. A profession is said to be regulated when access and exercise is subject to the possession of a specific professional qualification. The regulated professions database contains a list of regulated professions for doctor of medicine in the EU member states, EEA countries and Switzerland. This list is covered by the Directive 2005/36/EC.\nDoctors who are negligent or intentionally harmful in their care of patients can face charges of medical malpractice and be subject to civil, criminal, or professional sanctions.\nMedical ethics.\nMedical ethics is a system of moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine. As a scholarly discipline, medical ethics encompasses its practical application in clinical settings as well as work on its history, philosophy, theology, and sociology. Six of the values that commonly apply to medical ethics discussions are:\nValues such as these do not give answers as to how to handle a particular situation, but provide a useful framework for understanding conflicts. When moral values are in conflict, the result may be an ethical dilemma or crisis. Sometimes, no good solution to a dilemma in medical ethics exists, and occasionally, the values of the medical community (i.e., the hospital and its staff) conflict with the values of the individual patient, family, or larger non-medical community. Conflicts can also arise between health care providers, or among family members. For example, some argue that the principles of autonomy and beneficence clash when patients refuse blood transfusions, considering them life-saving; and truth-telling was not emphasized to a large extent before the HIV era.\nHistory.\nAncient world.\nPrehistoric medicine incorporated plants (herbalism), animal parts, and minerals. In many cases these materials were used ritually as magical substances by priests, shamans, or medicine men. Well-known spiritual systems include animism (the notion of inanimate objects having spirits), spiritualism (an appeal to gods or communion with ancestor spirits); shamanism (the vesting of an individual with mystic powers); and divination (magically obtaining the truth). The field of medical anthropology examines the ways in which culture and society are organized around or impacted by issues of health, health care and related issues.\nThe earliest known medical texts in the world were found in the ancient Syrian city of Ebla and date back to 2500 BCE. Other early records on medicine have been discovered from ancient Egyptian medicine, Babylonian Medicine, Ayurvedic medicine (in the Indian subcontinent), classical Chinese medicine (Alternative medicine) predecessor to the modern traditional Chinese medicine), and ancient Greek medicine and Roman medicine.\nIn Egypt, Imhotep (3rd millennium BCE) is the first physician in history known by name. The oldest Egyptian medical text is the \"Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus\" from around 2000 BCE, which describes gynaecological diseases. The \"Edwin Smith Papyrus\" dating back to 1600 BCE is an early work on surgery, while the \"Ebers Papyrus\" dating back to 1500 BCE is akin to a textbook on medicine.\nIn China, archaeological evidence of medicine in Chinese dates back to the Bronze Age Shang dynasty, based on seeds for herbalism and tools presumed to have been used for surgery. The \"Huangdi Neijing\", the progenitor of Chinese medicine, is a medical text written beginning in the 2nd century BCE and compiled in the 3rd century.\nIn India, the oldest known surgical text, the Sushruta Samhita written by the surgeon Sushruta, described numerous surgical operations, including the earliest forms of plastic surgery as well as methods of sterilization for surgical instruments. The earliest records of dedicated hospitals come from Mihintale in Sri Lanka where evidence of dedicated medicinal treatment facilities for patients are found.\nIn Greece, the ancient Greek physician Hippocrates, the \"father of modern medicine\", laid the foundation for a rational approach to medicine. Hippocrates introduced the Hippocratic Oath for physicians, which is still relevant and in use today, and was the first to categorize illnesses as acute, chronic, endemic and epidemic, and use terms such as, \"exacerbation, relapse, resolution, crisis, paroxysm, peak, and convalescence\". The Greek physician Galen was also one of the greatest surgeons of the ancient world and performed many audacious operations, including brain and eye surgeries. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages, the Greek tradition of medicine went into decline in Western Europe, although it continued uninterrupted in the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.\nMost of our knowledge of ancient Hebrew medicine during the 1st\u00a0millennium\u00a0BC comes from the Torah, i.e.\u00a0the Five Books of Moses, which contain various health related laws and rituals. The Hebrew contribution to the development of modern medicine started in the Byzantine Era, with the physician Asaph the Jew.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe concept of hospital as institution to offer medical care and possibility of a cure for the patients due to the ideals of Christian charity, rather than just merely a place to die, appeared in the Byzantine Empire.\nAlthough the concept of uroscopy was known to Galen, he did not see the importance of using it to localize the disease. It was under the Byzantines with physicians such of Theophilus Protospatharius that they realized the potential in uroscopy to determine disease in a time when no microscope or stethoscope existed. That practice eventually spread to the rest of Europe.\nAfter 750 CE, the Muslim world had the works of Hippocrates, Galen and Sushruta translated into Arabic, and Islamic physicians engaged in some significant medical research. Notable Islamic medical pioneers include the Persian polymath, Avicenna, who, along with Imhotep and Hippocrates, has also been called the \"father of medicine\". He wrote \"The Canon of Medicine\" which became a standard medical text at many medieval European universities, considered one of the most famous books in the history of medicine. Others include Abulcasis, Avenzoar, Ibn al-Nafis, and Averroes. Persian physician Rhazes was one of the first to question the Greek theory of humorism, which nevertheless remained influential in both medieval Western and medieval Islamic medicine. Some volumes of Rhazes's work \"Al-Mansuri\", namely \"On Surgery\" and \"A General Book on Therapy\", became part of the medical curriculum in European universities. Additionally, he has been described as a doctor's doctor, the father of pediatrics, and a pioneer of ophthalmology. For example, he was the first to recognize the reaction of the eye's pupil to light. The Persian Bimaristan hospitals were an early example of public hospitals.\nIn Europe, Charlemagne decreed that a hospital should be attached to each cathedral and monastery and the historian Geoffrey Blainey likened the activities of the Catholic Church in health care during the Middle Ages to an early version of a welfare state: \"It conducted hospitals for the old and orphanages for the young; hospices for the sick of all ages; places for the lepers; and hostels or inns where pilgrims could buy a cheap bed and meal\". It supplied food to the population during famine and distributed food to the poor. This welfare system the church funded through collecting taxes on a large scale and possessing large farmlands and estates. The Benedictine order was noted for setting up hospitals and infirmaries in their monasteries, growing medical herbs and becoming the chief medical care givers of their districts, as at the great Abbey of Cluny. The Church also established a network of cathedral schools and universities where medicine was studied. The Schola Medica Salernitana in Salerno, looking to the learning of Greek and Arab physicians, grew to be the finest medical school in medieval Europe.\nHowever, the fourteenth and fifteenth century Black Death devastated both the Middle East and Europe, and it has even been argued that Western Europe was generally more effective in recovering from the pandemic than the Middle East. In the early modern period, important early figures in medicine and anatomy emerged in Europe, including Gabriele Falloppio and William Harvey.\nThe major shift in medical thinking was the gradual rejection, especially during the Black Death in the 14th and 15th centuries, of what may be called the \"traditional authority\" approach to science and medicine. This was the notion that because some prominent person in the past said something must be so, then that was the way it was, and anything one observed to the contrary was an anomaly (which was paralleled by a similar shift in European society in general \u2013 see Copernicus's rejection of Ptolemy's theories on astronomy). Physicians like Vesalius improved upon or disproved some of the theories from the past. The main tomes used both by medicine students and expert physicians were Materia Medica and Pharmacopoeia.\nAndreas Vesalius was the author of \"De humani corporis fabrica\", an important book on human anatomy. Bacteria and microorganisms were first observed with a microscope by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in 1676, initiating the scientific field microbiology. Independently from Ibn al-Nafis, Michael Servetus rediscovered the pulmonary circulation, but this discovery did not reach the public because it was written down for the first time in the \"Manuscript of Paris\" in 1546, and later published in the theological work for which he paid with his life in 1553. Later this was described by Renaldus Columbus and Andrea Cesalpino. Herman Boerhaave is sometimes referred to as a \"father of physiology\" due to his exemplary teaching in Leiden and textbook 'Institutiones medicae' (1708). Pierre Fauchard has been called \"the father of modern dentistry\".\nModern.\nVeterinary medicine was, for the first time, truly separated from human medicine in 1761, when the French veterinarian Claude Bourgelat founded the world's first veterinary school in Lyon, France. Before this, medical doctors treated both humans and other animals.\nModern scientific biomedical research (where results are testable and reproducible) began to replace early Western traditions based on herbalism, the Greek \"four humours\" and other such pre-modern notions. The modern era really began with Edward Jenner's discovery of the smallpox vaccine at the end of the 18th century (inspired by the method of variolation originated in ancient China), Robert Koch's discoveries around 1880 of the transmission of disease by bacteria, and then the discovery of antibiotics around 1900.\nThe post-18th century modernity period brought more groundbreaking researchers from Europe. From Germany and Austria, doctors Rudolf Virchow, Wilhelm Conrad R\u00f6ntgen, Karl Landsteiner and Otto Loewi made notable contributions. In the United Kingdom, Alexander Fleming, Joseph Lister, Francis Crick and Florence Nightingale are considered important. Spanish doctor Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal is considered the father of modern neuroscience.\nFrom New Zealand and Australia came Maurice Wilkins, Howard Florey, and Frank Macfarlane Burnet.\nOthers that did significant work include William Williams Keen, William Coley, James D. Watson (United States); Salvador Luria (Italy); Alexandre Yersin (Switzerland); Kitasato Shibasabur\u014d (Japan); Jean-Martin Charcot, Claude Bernard, Paul Broca (France); Adolfo Lutz (Brazil); Nikolai Korotkov (Russia); Sir William Osler (Canada); and Harvey Cushing (United States).\nAs science and technology developed, medicine became more reliant upon medications. Throughout history and in Europe right until the late 18th century, not only plant products were used as medicine, but also animal (including human) body parts and fluids. Pharmacology developed in part from herbalism and some drugs are still derived from plants (atropine, ephedrine, warfarin, aspirin, digoxin, \"vinca\" alkaloids, taxol, hyoscine, etc.). Vaccines were discovered by Edward Jenner and Louis Pasteur.\nThe first antibiotic was arsphenamine (Salvarsan) discovered by Paul Ehrlich in 1908 after he observed that bacteria took up toxic dyes that human cells did not. The first major class of antibiotics was the sulfa drugs, derived by German chemists originally from azo dyes.\nPharmacology has become increasingly sophisticated; modern biotechnology allows drugs targeted towards specific physiological processes to be developed, sometimes designed for compatibility with the body to reduce side-effects. Genomics and knowledge of human genetics and human evolution is having increasingly significant influence on medicine, as the causative genes of most monogenic genetic disorders have now been identified, and the development of techniques in molecular biology, evolution, and genetics are influencing medical technology, practice and decision-making.\nEvidence-based medicine is a contemporary movement to establish the most effective algorithms of practice (ways of doing things) through the use of systematic reviews and meta-analysis. The movement is facilitated by modern global information science, which allows as much of the available evidence as possible to be collected and analyzed according to standard protocols that are then disseminated to healthcare providers. The Cochrane Collaboration leads this movement. A 2001 review of 160 Cochrane systematic reviews revealed that, according to two readers, 21.3% of the reviews concluded insufficient evidence, 20% concluded evidence of no effect, and 22.5% concluded positive effect.\nQuality, efficiency, and access.\nEvidence-based medicine, prevention of medical error (and other \"iatrogenesis\"), and avoidance of unnecessary health care are a priority in modern medical systems. These topics generate significant political and public policy attention, particularly in the United States where healthcare is regarded as excessively costly but population health metrics lag similar nations.\nHealth spending varies by country, which results in differences in access to care and access to medicines. Health care rationing varies by country. Most developed countries provide health care to all citizens, with a few exceptions such as the United States where restrictions on health insurance coverage may limit affordability.\nTelemedicine.\nTelemedicine (also Telehealth) refers to preventive, promotive, and curative care delivery, including remote clinical services, such as diagnosis, monitoring, administration and provider education. The main categories of telehealth:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18959", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18959", "title": "2001 Mars Odyssey", "text": "NASA orbiter for geology and hydrology\n2001 Mars Odyssey is a robotic spacecraft orbiting the planet Mars. The project was developed by NASA, and contracted out to Lockheed Martin, with an expected cost for the entire mission of US$297\u00a0million. Its mission is to use spectrometers and a thermal imager to detect evidence of past or present water and ice, as well as study the planet's geology and radiation environment. The data \"Odyssey\" obtains is intended to help answer the question of whether life once existed on Mars and create a risk-assessment of the radiation that future astronauts on Mars might experience. It also acts as a relay for communications between the \"Curiosity\" rover, and previously the Mars Exploration Rovers and \"Phoenix\" lander, to Earth. The mission was named as a tribute to Arthur C. Clarke, evoking the name of his and Stanley Kubrick's 1968 film \"\".\n\"Odyssey\" was launched April 7, 2001, on a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, and reached Mars orbit on October 24, 2001, at 02:30 UTC (October 23, 19:30 PDT, 22:30 EDT). As of March 2025, it is still collecting data, and is estimated to have enough propellant to function until the end of 2025. It currently holds the record for the longest-surviving continually active spacecraft in orbit around a planet other than Earth, ahead of the Pioneer Venus Orbiter (served 14 years) and the \"Mars Express\" (serving over 20 years), at . As of \u00a02019[ [update]] it is in a polar orbit around Mars with a semi-major axis of about 3,800\u00a0km or 2,400 miles.\nOn May 28, 2002 (sol ), NASA reported that \"Odyssey\"'s GRS instrument had detected large amounts of hydrogen, a sign that there must be ice lying within a meter of the planet's surface, and proceeded to map the distribution of water below the shallow surface. The orbiter also discovered vast deposits of bulk water ice near the surface of equatorial regions.\n\"Odyssey\" has also served as the primary means of communications for NASA's Mars surface explorers in the past decade, up to the \"Curiosity\" rover.\nNaming.\nIn August 2000, NASA solicited candidate names for the mission. Out of 200 names submitted, the committee chose Astrobiological Reconnaissance and Elemental Surveyor, abbreviated ARES (a tribute to Ares, the Greek god of war). Faced with criticism that this name was not very compelling, and too aggressive, the naming committee reconvened. The candidate name \"2001 Mars Odyssey\" had earlier been rejected because of copyright and trademark concerns. However, NASA e-mailed Arthur C. Clarke in Sri Lanka, who responded that he would be delighted to have the mission named after his books, and he had no objections. On September 20, NASA associate administrator Ed Weiler wrote to the associate administrator for public affairs recommending a name change from ARES to \"2001 Mars Odyssey\". Peggy Wilhide then approved the name change.\nScientific instruments.\nThe three primary instruments \"Odyssey\" uses are the:\nMission.\n\"Mars Odyssey\" launched from Cape Canaveral on April 7, 2001, and arrived at Mars about 200 days later on October 24. Upon arrival, the spacecraft's main engine fired in order to decelerate, which allowed it to be captured into orbit around Mars. \"Odyssey\" then spent about 76 days aerobraking, using aerodynamic drag from the upper reaches of the Martian atmosphere to gradually slow down and reduce and circularize its orbit. By planning to use the atmosphere of Mars to slow the spacecraft in its orbit rather than firing its engine or thrusters, \"Odyssey\" did not need an additional 200 kilograms (440 lb) of propellant on board. This reduction in spacecraft weight allowed the mission to be launched on a Delta II 7925 launch vehicle, rather than a larger, more expensive launcher.\nAerobraking ended in January 2002, and Odyssey began its science mapping mission on February 19, 2002. \"Odyssey\"'s original, nominal mission lasted until August 2004, but repeated mission extensions have kept the mission active.\nThe payload's MARIE radiation experiment stopped taking measurements after a large solar event bombarded the \"Odyssey\" spacecraft on October 28, 2003. Engineers believe the most likely cause is that a computer chip was damaged by a solar particle smashing into the MARIE computer board.\nAbout 85% of images and other data from NASA's twin Mars Exploration Rovers, \"Spirit\" and \"Opportunity\", have reached Earth via communications relay by \"Odyssey\". The orbiter helped analyze potential landing sites for the rovers and performed the same task for NASA's Phoenix mission, which landed on Mars in May 2008. \"Odyssey\" aided NASA's \"Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter\", which reached Mars in March 2006, by monitoring atmospheric conditions during months when the newly arrived orbiter used aerobraking to alter its orbit into the desired shape.\n\"Odyssey\" is in a Sun-synchronous orbit, which provides consistent lighting for its photographs. On September 30, 2008 (sol ) the spacecraft altered its orbit to gain better sensitivity for its infrared mapping of Martian minerals. The new orbit eliminated the use of the gamma ray detector, due to the potential for overheating the instrument at the new orbit.\nBy December 15, 2010, it broke the record for longest serving spacecraft at Mars, with 3,340 days of operation. \nThe orbiter's orientation is controlled by a set of three reaction wheels and a spare. When one failed in June 2012, the fourth was spun up and successfully brought into service. Since July 2012, \"Odyssey\" has been back in full, nominal operation mode following three weeks of 'safe' mode on remote maintenance.\n\"Mars Odyssey\"'s THEMIS instrument was used to help select a landing site for the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL). Several days before MSL's landing in August 2012, \"Odyssey\"'s orbit was altered to ensure that it would be able to capture signals from the rover during its first few minutes on the Martian surface. \"Odyssey\" also acted as a relay for UHF radio signals from the (MSL) rover \"Curiosity\". Because \"Odyssey\" is in a Sun-synchronous orbit, it passes over \"Curiosity\"'s location twice per day, enabling regular contact with Earth.\nOn February 11, 2014, mission control accelerated \"Odyssey\"'s drift toward a morning-daylight orbit to \"enable observation of changing ground temperatures after sunrise and after sunset in thousands of places on Mars\". The orbital change occurred gradually until November 2015. Those observations could yield insight about the composition of the ground and about temperature-driven processes, such as warm seasonal flows observed on some slopes, and geysers fed by spring thawing of carbon dioxide (CO2) ice near Mars's poles.\nOn October 19, 2014, NASA reported that the \"Mars Odyssey\" Orbiter, as well as the \"Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter\" and \"MAVEN\", were healthy after the Comet Siding Spring flyby.\nIn 2010, a spokesman for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory stated that \"Odyssey\" could continue operating until at least 2016. This estimate has since been extended to the end of 2025.\nMajor discoveries.\nBy 2008, \"Mars Odyssey\" had mapped the basic distribution of water below the shallow surface. The ground truth for its measurements came on July 31, 2008, when NASA announced that the Phoenix lander confirmed the presence of water on Mars, as predicted in 2002 based on data from the \"Odyssey\" orbiter. The science team is trying to determine whether the water ice ever thaws enough to be available for microscopic life, and if carbon-containing chemicals and other raw materials for life are present.\nThe orbiter also discovered vast deposits of bulk water ice near the surface of equatorial regions. Evidence for equatorial hydration is both morphological and compositional and is seen at both the Medusae Fossae formation and the Tharsis Montes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18963", "revid": "96240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18963", "title": "Miscellaneous poker", "text": ""}
