{"id": "17825", "revid": "11099276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17825", "title": "Telecommunications in Lithuania", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Lithuania include internet, radio, television, and telephony.\nThe Communications Regulatory Authority of the Republic of Lithuania (RRT) functions as the independent regulator for the country's electronic communications industry. Established under the Law on Telecommunications and the provisions with European Union Directives, its role is to facilitate a competitive environment within the industry.\nThe European Commission\u2019s 2022 Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) report evaluates Lithuania's digital progress among 27 EU nations. Ranking 23rd in overall connectivity, Lithuania stands out with Fixed Very High Capacity Network (VHCN) and Fiber-to-the-Premises (FTTP) coverage. In human capital, Lithuania ranks 20th, with a strength in digital skills. Notably, in the integration of digital technologies, Lithuania performs 13th, with advancements in Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) and e-commerce. Digital public services earn the 10th rank, with aspirations for 100% online key public services by 2026. Additionally, the country has focused on enhancing broadband infrastructure, particularly in less urban areas. Efforts in cybersecurity and the development of smart city solutions are also highlighted.\nInternet and digital progress.\nUsers and skills.\nIn 2022, internet usage among individuals in Lithuania reached 87%, just below the EU average of 89%. The country has made progress in enhancing digital skills but still encounters hurdles in achieving the Digital Decade targets set for 2030. As of 2022, 49% of the population had attained at least basic digital skills, slightly under the EU average of 54%, and the proportion of individuals with above-basic digital skills was 23%, marginally lower than the EU benchmark of 26%.\nFixed broadband.\nIn Lithuania, the uptake of broadband services with speeds of at least 100 Mbps was 52% in 2022, marginally below the European Union (EU) average of 55%. Coverage of Fixed Very High Capacity Network (VHCN) and Fiber to the Premises (FTTP) was at 78%, surpassing the EU averages of 73% and 56%, respectively. The \"Development of Next Generation Access Infrastructure\" project, funded by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) for the period 2018\u20132023, facilitated the installation of 1,235 kilometers of fiber-optic lines and initiated the construction of telecommunication towers. Additionally, as part of the revised National Broadband Plan, the \"Development of gigabit broadband infrastructure for digitally sensitive users\" project, supported by EUR 49 million from the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF), is designed to extend connectivity to 5,000 users across private companies, non-governmental and governmental organizations, municipalities, and municipal companies.\nMobile broadband.\nLithuania's adoption of mobile broadband demonstrated growth, increasing from 74% in 2018 to 85% in 2021, marginally below the EU average of 87%. The expansion of 5G coverage in the country was notably rapid, commencing from 0% in 2020 to 33% in 2021, and subsequently increasing to 90% in 2022, thereby surpassing the EU average of 81%. Moreover, Lithuania's advancement in the allocation of 5G spectrum experienced a marked rise, advancing from 5% in 2021 to 47% in 2023, catching up to the EU average of 68%.\nUltra-fast broadband goals.\nThe European Commission's \"Broadband in Lithuania\" report from September 2022 outlines Lithuania's plan, initiated in October 2021, to implement ultra-fast broadband. This plan aims to provide internet speeds of at least 100 Mbit/s (megabits per second) to households and public institutions in both urban and rural areas by 2027. Such speeds are suitable for various online activities. Aligned with the Lithuanian Information Society Development Programme and the Digital Agenda of the Republic of Lithuania, the initiative is designed for nationwide broadband infrastructure expansion.\nIn terms of infrastructure, Lithuania has committed \u20ac75 million to construct communication towers and install fiber optic lines, striving for 95% of households to have access to these high-speed Internet services by 2025. Additionally, the Ministry of Transport and Communications is guiding the country's 5G advancements. Guidelines established in 2020 focus on rolling out next-generation mobile networks, including uninterrupted 5G services along major transport routes by 2025.\nDigital public services.\nIn 2022, Lithuania's usage of e-government services by internet users reached 83%, exceeding the EU average of 74%. The nation's digital public services for citizens and businesses scored 84 and 94 out of 100, respectively, surpassing the EU averages of 77 and 84. Mobile friendliness in Lithuania was rated at 97 out of 100. Additionally, Lithuania's access to e-health records scored 92 out of 100, exceeding the EU average of 72. The country is implementing a digital public and administrative services reform with a budget of EUR 115 million, aiming for completion by 2026. This includes modernizing the State Information Resources Interoperability Platform (Electronic Government Gateway).\nInternet censorship.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority. Individuals and groups generally engage in the free expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail, but authorities prosecute people for openly posting material on the Internet that authorities considered to be inciting hatred.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine to promote these freedoms. However, the constitutional definition of freedom of expression does not protect certain acts, such as incitement to national, racial, religious, or social hatred, violence and discrimination, or slander, and disinformation. It is a crime to deny or \"grossly trivialise\" Soviet or Nazi German crimes against Lithuania or its citizens, or to deny genocide, crimes against humanity, or war crimes. In the first 11 months of 2012 authorities initiated investigations into 259 allegations of incitement of hatred and six of incitement of discrimination, most of them over the Internet. Authorities forwarded 69 of those allegations to the courts for trial, closed 68, and suspended 113 for lack of evidence; the others remained under investigation. Most allegations of incitement of hatred involved racist or anti-Semitic expression, or hostility based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or nationality.\nIt is a crime to disseminate information that is both untrue and damaging to an individual's honour and dignity. Libel is punishable by a fine or imprisonment of up to one year, or up to two years for libellous material disseminated through the mass media. While it is illegal to publish material \"detrimental to minors\u2019 bodies\" or thought processes, information promoting the sexual abuse and harassment of minors, promoting sexual relations among minors, or \"sexual relations\", the law is not often invoked and there are no indications that it adversely affects freedom of the media.\nThe constitution prohibits arbitrary interference in an individual's personal correspondence or private and family life, but there were reports that the government did not respect these prohibitions in practice. The law requires authorities to obtain judicial authorisation before searching an individual's premises and prohibits the indiscriminate monitoring by government or other parties of citizens\u2019 correspondence or communications. However, domestic human rights groups allege that the government does not properly enforce the law.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17826", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17826", "title": "Transport in Lithuania", "text": " \nTransport in Lithuania relies mainly on road and rail networks.\nLithuanian road system.\n\"total:\"\n&lt;br&gt;\"paved:\"\n&lt;br&gt;\"unpaved:\"\nControlled-access highways sections.\nThere are two categories of controlled-access highways in Lithuania: expressways (Lithuanian: \"greitkeliai\") with maximum speed 120\u00a0km/h and motorways (Lithuanian: \"automagistral\u0117s\") with maximum speed 130\u00a0km/h.\nA road system.\nThe A roads (Lithuanian: \"magistraliniai keliai\") total . \nMajor highway projects in Interwar Lithuania.\nBefore World War I, there were few isolated routes suitable for transit traffic e.g. present day A12 highway, connecting Riga with Kaliningrad, or present day A6 highway which was part of highway Warsaw\u2013Saint Petersburg that ran through Kaunas. After Lithuania became an independent country in 1918, there was increased demand for new highways for inner needs. First long-distance highways built exclusively by the Lithuanian government were opened in the late 1930s. These are following:\nRailways.\nThere is a total of 1,998 route km of railways, of which:\nWaterways.\nThere are that are perennially navigable.\nPipelines.\nIn 1992, there were of crude oil pipelines, and of natural gas pipelines.\nMerchant marine.\nThe merchant marine consists of 47 ships of 1,000 GT or over, together totaling 279,743 GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT).\nShips by type: \nCargo 25, Combination bulk 8, Petroleum tanker 2, Railcar carrier 1, Refrigerated cargo 6, Roll on/roll off 2, Short-sea passenger 3.\n\"Note:\" These totals include some foreign-owned ships registered here as a flag of convenience: Denmark 13 (2002 est.)\nAirports.\nIn Lithuania, there are four international airports:"}
{"id": "17827", "revid": "50967174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17827", "title": "Lithuanian Armed Forces", "text": "Armed forces of Lithuania\nThe Lithuanian Armed Forces () are the military of Lithuania. The Lithuanian Armed Forces consist of the Lithuanian Land Forces, the Lithuanian Navy, the Lithuanian Air Force and the Lithuanian Special Operations Force. In wartime, the Lithuanian State Border Guard Service (which is under the supervision of the Ministry of the Interior in peacetime) becomes part of the Lithuanian Armed Forces.\nThe purpose of the Lithuanian Armed Forces are to be the principal deterrent against any security threat to the nation. Lithuania's defence system is based on the concept of \"total and unconditional defence\" mandated by Lithuania's \"National Security Strategy\". The goal of Lithuania's defence policy is to prepare their society for general defence and to integrate Lithuania into Western security and defence structures. The Ministry of National Defence is responsible for combat forces, search and rescue, and intelligence operations.\nMale conscription is in place since 2015, when it was reinstated after being ended in 2008, due to concerns about the geopolitical environment in light of the Russo-Ukrainian War.\nIn early 2022, Lithuania's defence budget for 2022 was approximately \u20ac1.05 billion,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[c] but it was increased to \u20ac1.5 billion on 17 March 2022. In 2024, the budget was raised to \u20ac2.3 billion and is projected to reach 3.03% of GDP.\nHistory.\nGrand Ducal Lithuanian Army.\nThe Lithuanian military originates in the Grand Ducal Lithuanian Army, active from the 13th century to 1795. After the Union of Lublin in 1569, the Lithuanian Army remained equal to the Polish Crown army in the military of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth until the Third Partition in 1795. The Grand Ducal Lithuanian Army fought in many major battles, such as the Battle of Blue Waters (1362/63), Battle of Grunwald (1410), Battle of Orsha (1514) and Battle of Kircholm (1605).\nSimilarly to other medieval European states, the army was raised by the nobility during the Late Middle Ages. By the 17th century, it was mostly outclassed by professional forces and a standing army was instituted.\n13th century.\nFrom the 12th century's end and into the 13th century, Lithuania frequently went to war against the western and southwestern Rus' states, Kingdom of Galicia-Volhynia and Duchy of Masovia, and also devastated the lands along the Daugava and elsewhere. From the early 1200s, Lithuanians fought against the Swordbrothers, then from 1237 against the Livonian Order, and from the second half of the 13th century's against the State of the Teutonic Order. Fighting on Lithuania's northern and western frontiers was unceasing, the Lithuanian state expanded southwards and eastwards in the Late Middle Ages. The Lithuanian army was mobile, as it had to fight on many fronts: the State of the Teutonic Order to the west, the Livonian Order to the north, the Golden Horde and its vassal Muscovy to the east, and the Tatar khanates to the south. According to 13th-century sources, Lithuanian soldiers rode horses on military expeditions but fought on foot, arranged in three rows during battles. The best-armed and most experienced fought in the front, while the least experienced and lightly armed were in the last row. Furthermore, the Lithuanians were skilled at fighting using spears, especially on horseback. The earliest written mention of such tactics, from 1208, says that Lithuanians on horses threw spears at their enemies.\nAlthough the Germans initially had superior weaponry in the 13th century, the Lithuanians won the Battles of Saule (1236), Durbe (1260), Karuse (1270) and the Aizkraukle (1279). However they were less successful against enemy fortifications, especially brick castles. Eventually the front lines stabilised over time, and the one against the Livonian Order more or less followed the modern Latvia\u2013Lithuania border, while the one against the Teutonic Order was close to the Nemunas. A castle system fortified the Lithuanian side of the border along the river.\n14th century.\nOver the 14th century, the Teutonic and Livonian orders organised raids into Lithuania. Lithuanians reciprocated by raiding their respective territories, but the Lithuanian raids were fewer in number. The Lithuanians won the Battle of Medininkai (1320), but lost the Battle of Str\u0117va (1348). More and more, the Teutonic Order destroyed the Lithuanian castle system along the Nemunas and built their own castles near the Lithuanian ones. As the German and Livonian orders were constantly reinforced by Christian European countries, it became increasingly difficult to defend Lithuania solely by military means. A new generation of the Lithuanian Grand Dukes, Jogaila and Vytautas the Great, used not only military, but also diplomatic and political means, for example Lithuanian baptism in 1387, to protect Lithuania.\nMeanwhile, on the other side of Lithuania, the Golden Horde's army was destroyed in the Battle of Blue Waters (1362\u20131363). In 1368, 1370, and 1372, the Lithuanian Grand Duke Algirdas led the Grand Ducal Lithuanian Army on military expeditions against Muscovy. However, the Battle of the Vorksla River (1399) was a decisive victory for the Golden Horde.\n15th century.\nFinally, the German Teutonic Order was crushed in the Battle of Grunwald (1410) (known as Battle of \u017dalgiris in Lithuanian historiography), which was the largest Middle Age battle in Central and Eastern Europe. In this key battle, the Lithuanian Army was led by Vytautas the Great. Under him, the Lithuanian Army attacked the lands of the Republics of Pskov, in 1426, and Novgorod, in 1428. The Grand Duchy of Lithuania had internal civil wars in the first half of the 15th century. The Lithuania Army engaged in biological warfare already in 1422, when it catapulted manure made from infected victims into an opposing Bohemian town as part of the Hussite Wars. In 1435, Sigismund K\u0119stutaitis' army defeated the opposing army, which included troops of the Livonian Order, led by \u0160vitrigaila in the Battle of Wi\u0142komierz.\n16th century.\nThis century was marked by war of Lithuania against Muscovy and the Crimean Khanate, against whom they won the Battle of Kletsk in 1506. The strengthening Grand Duchy of Moscow starting in the late 15th century waged unceasing wars over Lithuania's eastern territories. In 1514, during the fourth war, the Lithuanians triumphed over the numerically larger Muscovite army in the famous Battle of Orsha. However, Lithuania lost a part of its eastern lands, most notably the strategically important fortress of Smolensk. The Grand Ducal Lithuanian Army fought against Muscovy in the Livonian War and won against the Muscovite army, twice its size in the Battle of Ula in 1564. Three years into the Livonian War, the Treaty of Vilnius. made Livonia part of Lithuania in 1561 with the Union of Lublin concluded in 1569. In the late 1570s and early 1580s, the Lithuanian and Polish armies cooperated in Stephen B\u00e1thory's incursions into Russia.\n17th century.\nThe 17th century was marked by wars against Sweden, the Tsardom of Muscovy and the Ottoman Empire. The Lithuanian army and the Polish army fought against the Ottoman forces notably at both Battles of Khotyn in 1621 and 1673. During the war with Sweden from 1600 to 1629, the Lithuanian army defeated Swedish forces three times their number at the Battle of Kircholm in 1605. However, this war highlighted the Commonwealth's difficulty recruiting and retaining enough troops, better arming its soldiers with firearms and bettering their use. Sweden seized a significant part of Livonia as part of Swedish Livonia. In the first half of the 17th century, Smolensk returned to Lithuania following the Smolensk War.\nThe Commonwealth's military weakness in the middle and late 17th century was evidenced in the Deluge. In 1655, the much-smaller Lithuanian army could not defend the Lithuanian capital of Vilnius against Muscovite attack. This was the first time that Vilnius was occupied by a foreign state. The Swedish and Muscovite armies occupied large parts of Lithuania. Nevertheless, Lithuania succeeded in holding out and liberated Vilnius, Kaunas, Samogitia and the eastern Voivodeships, except for Smolensk Voivodeship and other parts. Militarily speaking, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania was weakening however.\n18th century.\nDuring the Great Northern War the Grand Ducal Lithuanian Army no longer defended the country and the Lithuanian magnates' private armies supported different sides. Throughout the 18th century, many confederations in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth sought different political goals. The Bar Confederation (1768\u20131772), which happened partly in Lithuania, attempted but failed to stem the increasing influence of Imperial Russia and the First partition of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth followed. In the face of the possible loss of independence, military reforms in the Four Years' Sejm (1788\u20131792) significantly expanded the Lithuanian army, which reached a strength of 17,500. Attempts to make the Commonwealth's armies equal those of neighbouring absolute monarchies were unsuccessful and the unsuccessful War of 1792 resulted in the Second Partition.\nThe Polish and Lithuanian armies put up a spirited fight against the Imperial Russian Army and the Prussian Army in the Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising. In addition to regular forces, many \"ad hoc\" units such as the Vilnian National Guard also fought, as well as many irregular units. In the end, the Uprising was defeated and much of the remainder of the Grand Ducal Lithuanian Army was lost in the Battle of Praga on 4 November 1794. With the uprising defeated, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland ended with the Third Partition, and their respective armies being disbanded.\nInterwar and post-war periods.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAfter Lithuania's restoration on 16 February 1918, the country immediately began creating an army. The Ministry of Defence's first order, issued on 23 November 1918, is considered to mark the establishment of the modern Lithuanian Armed Forces. The newly-formed army almost immediately fought three wars of independence. Having won the Lithuanian\u2013Soviet War and the war against the Bermontians, Lithuania lost large chunks of territory, including its capital Vilnius in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian War. Armoured equipment in the interwar period,primarily consisted of light tanks and armored cars: French Renault FT-17s, British Vickers Carden-Loyd M1934s and M1936s, Swedish Landsverk-181, and German Ehrhardt E-V/4. In 1935, the country opened an advanced military research laboratory, specialising in chemical materials for ammunition as well as defence against chemical warfare. The construction of the laboratory was supervised by Juozas V\u0117bra. In 1940, Lithuania had a considerable Air Force, consisting of 118 aircraft with about half of them designed and produced locally. During the World War II, Lithuania was invaded by both Nazis and Soviets, which eventually concluded in Soviet occupation. The Lithuanian Armed Forces transformed into the Lithuanian People's Army in 1940 under the People's Government of Lithuania. Despite Soviet deportations from Lithuania, armed Lithuanian resistance lasted until the 1950s.\nRestoration and NATO.\nFollowing the restoration of independence, the defence forces were formally reestablished on 25 April 1990 with the creation of the Department of National Defence. After the January Events, the Voluntary National Defence Service was formed of lightly armed volunteers. The Lithuanian Armed Forces were officially restored on 19 November 1992. Western European countries, especially Sweden, helped to arm the initial force by selling or donating excess equipment. Lithuania began the modernisation of its military, becoming the first European country to acquire the US-made FGM-148 Javelin systems in 2001 and the FIM-92 Stinger systems in 2002.\nLithuania applied for NATO membership in 1994 and eventually joined the alliance in 2004. It has modernised its armed forces and participated in various international missions including the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan. Conscription ended in September 2008, but was reintroduced in 2015 due to deteriorating geopolitical environment after the Russia's military intervention in Ukraine. NATO also responded by establishing the NATO Enhanced Forward Presence in 2017 with a battlegroup in Lithuania which was led by Germany.\nAfter the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nAfter the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Lithuania rapidly increased the defence spending, becoming one of the top spenders by GDP in the NATO military alliance. The following years marked major acquisitions, including M142 HIMARS with the ATACMS tactical ballistic missiles, additional NASAMS medium-range air defence systems and artillery ammunition. In 2023, Lithuanian leadership approved the plans to form an army division, based on the three army brigades. As part of the plan, the country also decided to acquire Leopard 2 tanks. In 2023, Germany agreed to deploy a brigade in Lithuania on a permanent basis. The Bundeswehr's 45th Panzer Brigade, consisting of ~5,000 troops, is scheduled to be deployed by 2027. On 28 January 2025, the 1st Division was re-created.\nOrganization.\nThe President of Lithuania is the commander-in-chief of the Lithuanian Armed Forces according to the Constitution of Lithuania. Ministry of National Defence is directly responsible for the organisation of the defence system. Chief of Defence () is subordinate to the Minister of National Defence. Defence Staff () of the Armed Forces is responsible for the preparation of defence and mobilisation plans.\nThe Lithuanian Armed Forces consist of the Lithuanian Land Force, Lithuanian Air Force, Lithuanian Navy, Lithuanian Special Operations Force and other units:\nSupport branches of the Armed Forces:\nSeparate units directly subordinated to the Armed Forces Command:\nDirectly subordinated to the Chief of Defence are the Special Operations Force and Military Police. The Reserve Forces are under command of the Lithuanian National Defence Volunteer Forces. Lithuanian Riflemen's Union is a paramilitary organization that cooperates with the Armed Forces, but it is not part of them. However, during the state of war, its armed formations fall under the command of the Armed Forces. The same applies to the State Border Guard Service and the Public Security Service.\nLand Forces.\nThe core of the Lithuanian Land Forces structure is the Mechanised Infantry Brigade Iron Wolf (MIB \"Iron Wolf\") consisting of four mechanized infantry battalions and an artillery battalion, supported by the \"\u017demaitija\" Motorized infantry Brigade, which has three battalions and one artillery battalion as well. The third, \"Auk\u0161taitija\" Light Infantry Brigade, is a reserve formation with active training. Its command, signal and logistic units are manned by professional soldiers.\nThe Volunteer Forces form another brigade-size force, consisting of six territorial units. Other auxiliary units include \"Juozas Vitkus Engineer Battalion\" and \"Juozas Luk\u0161a Land Forces Training Center\".\nThe Lithuanian Land forces use equipment compatible with NATO standards. Since 2007, the standard assault rifle is the German Heckler &amp; Koch G36. Units are supplied with modern variants of anti-tank weapons (M72 LAW, Carl Gustaf, AT4, FGM-148 Javelin) as well as man-portable air-defense systems (PZR Grom, RBS-70, FIM-92 Stinger). Modern armoured equipment includes: Oshkosh L-ATV armoured cars, Boxer infantry fighting vehicles (local designation IVF \"Vilkas\") armed with Spike-LR anti-tank missiles and PzH 2000 self-propelled howitzers. Lithuanian Land forces have carried out major modernization and acquired more new weapons and heavier armour.\nLithuania has been restructuring its armed forces so that one-tenth of the Land Forces could at any given time be deployed for international operations, while half of the Land Forces would be prepared to deploy outside Lithuania's borders. The volunteers have already successfully participated in international operations in the Balkans, Afghanistan and Iraq.\nIn May 2023, the State Defence Council approved the plan to form an army division, based on the three army brigades. The 1st Division would have enhanced capabilities, including new tank, reconnaissance, engineering and artillery battalions.\nAir Force.\nThe Lithuanian Air Force (LAF) is an integral part of the Lithuanian Armed Forces. The LAF is formed by professional military servicemen and non-military personnel. Units are located at various bases across Lithuania:\nThe initial formation of the LAF was the 2nd transport squadron with the transfer of 20 An-2 aircraft from civilian to military use, with initial basing at the Barysiai Airport on 27 April 1992. These were joined by four L-39C Albatros aircraft to be used by the 1st fighter (training) squadron. These were in addition to Mil Mi-8 helicopters and a short-range transport aircraft L-410, all of which went through a capital overhaul, upgrade and modernisation in the 2000s.\nFollowing the initial acquisitions, the LAF began its aircraft's modernisation by ordering three C-27J Spartan transporters in 2006. In 2013, three Eurocopter AS365 Dauphin helicopters were acquired from France and, in 2020, Lithuania announced an order or four Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk helicopters from the USA. Simultaneously, new medium-range and long-range radars were acquired for the Airspace Surveillance and Control Command.\nAir space is patrolled by jet fighters from other NATO members and they are based in Zokniai Air Base, near the city of \u0160iauliai (see Baltic Air Policing). The external border of the European Union (with Kaliningrad and Belarus) is patrolled by the Aviation Unit of the Lithuanian State Border Guard Service which, since the 2000s, uses helicopters EC-120, EC-135 and EC-145.\nNavy.\nThe Navy consists of the Warship Flotilla, the Sea Coastal Surveillance System, the Naval Logistic Service, Training Center and Maritime Rescue Coordination Center. The flotilla is the core component of the Navy and consists of the Mine Countermeasures Squadron, the Patrol Ships Squadron, and the Harbour Boats Group. The current Commander in Chief of the Lithuanian Navy is Flotilla Admiral Giedrius Premeneckas. The Naval base and Headquarters are located in the city of Klaip\u0117da. The Navy uses patrol ships for coastal surveillance. The four newly acquired s replaced the older s and s.\nMarine fusiliers.\nFrom 1 August 2022, in order to eliminate the coastal and port defense gap and perform other functions assigned to the marines, the Naval Forces Port and Coastal Defense Service was established and partially formed by merging the Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) Divers Team and the Naval Forces Logistics Service Security Company into one structure, which includes two infantry (fusilier) companies. In the process of forming the unit's traditions, the soldiers serving in the unit began to be called marine fusiliers (marine infantry), and the service itself is unofficially called the Fusilier Battalion.\nIn April 2025, the Navy announced that the marine unit would be officially renamed the General Kazimieras Nestoras Sapiega Fusiliers Battalion and would continue the traditions of the 7th Fusiliers Regiment.\nSpecial Operations Forces.\nThe Lithuanian Special Operations Forces of Lithuanian Armed Forces have been in operation \"de facto\" since 2002 and it were established \"de jure\" on 3 April 2008, when amendments of National Defence System organisation and military service law came into force.\nThe Special Operations Forces are responsible for special reconnaissance, direct actions, and military support. They have also in charge of other tasks, e.g., protection of VIPs in peacetime. They are formed by the Special Purpose Service, Vytautas the Great Jaeger Battalion and Combat Divers Service. The Special Operations Forces organization is flexible, which makes it easy to form squadrons intended for specific operations and missions. The Special Operations Forces can be called upon inside the territory of Lithuania when law enforcement agencies lack or do not have the necessary capabilities to react to terrorist attacks.\nThe Special Operations Forces Squadron \"Aitvaras\" was deployed to Afghanistan for Operation Enduring Freedom. From 2005 to 2006 its squadrons were on standby as part of the NATO Response Force.\nInternational cooperation.\nLithuania has been a member of NATO military alliance since 2004. In the European Union, Lithuanian Armed Forces have also taken part in the Nordic Battle Group since 2008. Lithuanian Armed Forces also participate in the Joint Expeditionary Force formed in 2014.\nIn 2009, to encourage regional cooperation, Lithuania joined the initiative to form the Lithuanian\u2013Polish\u2013Ukrainian Brigade.\nNATO membership.\nSoon after the restoration of independence, Lithuania applied for NATO membership in January 1994. Together with another six Central and Eastern European countries, Lithuania was invited to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in the 2002 Prague summit and became a member of the Alliance in March 2004. Lithuania entered NATO on full-fledged rights immediately after the procedures of joining the North Atlantic Treaty were completed and acquired rights to participate in the political decision-making process of the Alliance. Integration into the military structures of NATO became a long-term task of the Lithuanian Armed Forces. Mechanised Infantry Brigade \"Iron Wolf\" was affiliated to the Danish Division based on agreements signed by Denmark and Lithuania in August 2006. Lithuanian Armed Forces started to boost the Brigade's ability to cooperate with the forces of other NATO members.\nBaltic Air Policing was established by NATO allies since Lithuania and the other Baltic states do not have capabilities to secure their airspace. Fighter jets of NATO members are permanently deployed in Zokniai airport near the city \u0160iauliai to provide cover for the Baltic states airspace. In 2013, NATO Energy Security Centre of Excellence was established in Vilnius.\nFollowing the 2016 Warsaw summit, NATO Enhanced Forward Presence was deployed in the Baltic States with the multinational battalion battle group in Lithuania being led by Germany.\nCooperation between the Baltic States.\nLithuania also cooperates with the two other Baltic states \u2013 Latvia and Estonia in several trilateral Baltic defence co-operation initiatives:\nIn January 2011, the Baltic states were invited to join Nordic Defence Cooperation, the defence framework of the Nordic countries. In November 2012, the three countries agreed to create a joint military staff in 2013. Future co-operation will include sharing of national infrastructures for training purposes and specialisation of training areas \"(BALTTRAIN)\" and collective formation of battalion-sized contingents for use in the NATO rapid-response force.\nForeign missions and operations.\nLithuanian soldiers have taken part in international operations since 1993. From the summer of 2005 until 2014, Lithuania has been part of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF), leading a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in the town of Chaghcharan in the province of Ghor. The PRT included personnel from Denmark, Iceland and the US. There have also been special operation forces units in Afghanistan. They were placed in Kandahar province.\nSince joining international operations in 1993, Lithuania has lost two soldiers. 1st Lt. Normundas Valteris fell in Bosnia (17 April 1996), Sgt. Ar\u016bnas Jarmalavi\u010dius in Afghanistan (22 May 2008).\nMilitary industry.\nAfter the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Lithuania has sought to develop its military industrial base. Lithuania has made a contract with the company Rheinmetall about establishing an artillery ammunition and artillery charge (gunpowder) production plant in Lithuania.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\na. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The 23,000 is structured like this: 14,500 in the Army, 1,500 in the Air Force, 700 in the Navy, and 6,300 in other units. The other units includes the Logistics Support Command (1,400), Training and Doctrine Command (1,500), the Special Operations Force (unknown) as well as the battalions of HQ and Military Police (2,600).\nb. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The paramilitary includes 10,600 of the Riflemen's Union and 3,550 of the State Border Guard Service.\nc. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The number of 1.05 billion is without including military pensions. When the military pensions are included, the military budget reaches 1.12 billion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"As of , this article uses content from \"http://\", authored by Ministry of National Defence Republic of Lithuania, which is licensed in a way that permits reuse under the , but not under the . All relevant terms must be followed.\""}
{"id": "17828", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17828", "title": "Foreign relations of Lithuania", "text": " \nLithuania is a European country located on the south-eastern shore of the Baltic Sea. It is a member of the United Nations, the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation and the World Trade Organisation. Currently, Lithuania maintains diplomatic relations with 186 states. It became a member of the United Nations on 18 September 1991, and is a signatory to a number of its organizations and other international agreements. It is also a member of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and its adjunct North Atlantic Coordinating Council, the Council of Europe, and the European Union. Lithuania gained membership in the World Trade Organization on 31 May 2001.\nLithuania's membership in the EU.\nOn 1 May 2004, Lithuania became one of the 27 member states of the European Union. The EU activities affect different spheres of politics, from consumer rights to national defence matters. In the second half of 2013, Lithuania took presidency over the EU Council. Membership in the Union has strengthened the domestic economy, giving it access to the wide pan-European market. Foreign direct investments in Lithuania are growing. The country is poised to become energy-independent. The accession to the Schengen space in 2007 has opened up possibilities for the free movement of both citizens and goods across 25 European states. Lithuania's citizens enjoy equal social guarantees while working, travelling, or studying at the Community's countries. The country now benefits from additional EU fund and programme funding in the field of education and science. As an EU citizen, every citizen of Lithuania has the guarantee of consular assistance of EU representative offices in countries where Lithuania has none.\nLithuania's membership in NATO.\nOn 29 March 2004, Lithuania became a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation It is a defensive union based on political and military cooperation of sovereign states. Its members are committed to protecting freedom, guarding shared heritage and civilisation under the principles of democracy, individual freedom, and superiority of law. According to Article 5 of the agreement, all NATO states are obliged to defend one another. Lithuania entered into cooperation with NATO in 1991. Five years later, Lithuania launched its mission to the organisation, and in late 2002, Lithuania and six other states was invited to start negotiations over membership in the Alliance. Today Lithuania sees NATO as the key and most effective collective defence system, one that ensures the security of the state and stands to defer potential aggression, and employs every measure available to strengthen trans-Atlantic relations to contribute to the strengthening of the EU-U.S. relations.\nLithuania as a part of the Northern Europe region.\nLithuania is also an active member in the cooperation between Northern Europe countries. Lithuania is a member of the interparliamentary Baltic Assembly, the intergovernmental Baltic Council of Ministers and the Council of the Baltic Sea States.\nLithuania also cooperates with Nordic and other two Baltic countries through Nordic-Baltic Eight cooperation format. The similar format, called NB6 unites Nordic and Baltic countries members of EU. The main goal of NB6 cooperation is to discuss and agree on positions before presenting them in the Council of the European Union and the meetings of the EU Foreign Affairs Ministers.\nThe Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) was established in 1992 in Copenhagen as an informal regional political forum, which main aim is to promote integration process and to affiliate close contacts between the countries of the region. The members of CBSS are Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Russia, Sweden and European Commission. The observer states are Belarus, France, Italy, Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, United States, United Kingdom, Ukraine.\nThe cooperation between the Nordic Council of Ministers and Lithuania is a political cooperation through which experience exchange contributes to realization of joint goals. One of its most important functions is to discover new trends and new possibilities for joint cooperation. The information office aims to represent Nordic concepts and demonstrate Nordic cooperation in Lithuania.\nLithuania, together with other two Baltic countries, is also a member of Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) and cooperates in NORDPLUS programme committed to education.\nBaltic Development Forum (BDF) is an independent nonprofit organization which unites large companies, cities, business associations and institutions in the Baltic Sea region. In 2010 the 12th Summit of the BDF was held in Vilnius.\nSince 2014, Lithuania participates in the British-led Joint Expeditionary Force, a multi-national military partnership.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Lithuania maintains diplomatic relations with:\nIssues.\nIllicit drug trafficking.\nLithuania has been a trans-shipment point for opiates and other illicit drugs from Russia, Southwest Asia, Latin America, and Western Europe to Eastern Europe and Scandinavia.\nAnti-terrorism.\nLithuania is a signatory to 8 of the 12 International Conventions related to counter-\nterrorist activities\nHuman trafficking.\nThe International Organization for Migration (IOM) reports that about 1,000 citizens of Lithuania fall victim to trafficking annually. Most are women between the ages of 21 and 30 who are sold into prostitution\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17830", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17830", "title": "History of Luxembourg", "text": "The history of Luxembourg consists of the history of the country of Luxembourg and its geographical area.\nAlthough its recorded history can be traced back to Roman times, the history of Luxembourg proper is considered to begin in 963. Over the following five centuries, the powerful House of Luxembourg emerged, but its extinction put an end to the country's independence. After a brief period of Burgundian rule, the country passed to the Habsburgs in 1477.\nAfter the Eighty Years' War, Luxembourg became a part of the Southern Netherlands, which passed to the Austrian line of the Habsburg dynasty in 1713. After occupation by Revolutionary France, the 1815 Vienna Congress transformed Luxembourg into a Grand Duchy in personal union with the Netherlands. The treaty also resulted in the second partitioning of Luxembourg, the first being in 1658 and a third in 1839. Although these treaties greatly reduced Luxembourg's territory, the latter established its formal independence, which was confirmed after the Luxembourg Crisis of 1867.\nIn the following decades, Luxembourg fell further into Germany's sphere of influence, particularly after the creation of a separate ruling house in 1890. It was occupied by Germany from 1914 until 1918 and again from 1940 until 1944. Since the end of the Second World War, Luxembourg has become one of the world's richest countries, buoyed by political stability and European integration.\nEarly history.\nIn the territory now covered by the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, there is evidence of primitive inhabitants dating back to the Paleolithic or Old Stone Age over 35,000 years ago. The oldest artifacts from this period are decorated bones found at Oetrange.\nHowever, the first real evidence of civilisation is from the Neolithic or 5th millennium BC, from which evidence of houses has been found. Traces have been found in the south of Luxembourg at Grevenmacher, Diekirch, Aspelt and Weiler-la-Tour. The dwellings were made of a combination of tree trunks for the basic structure, mud-clad wickerwork walls, and roofs of thatched reeds or straw. Pottery from this period has been found near Remerschen.\nWhile there is not much evidence of communities in Luxembourg at the beginning of the Bronze Age, a number of sites dating back to the period between the 13th and the 8th century BC provide evidence of dwellings and reveal artefacts such as pottery, knives and jewellery. The sites include Nospelt, Dalheim, Mompach and Remerschen.\nWhat is present-day Luxembourg, was inhabited by Celts during the Iron Age (from roughly 600 BC until 100 AD).\nThe Gaulish tribe in what is present-day Luxembourg during and after the La T\u00e8ne period was known as the Treveri; they reached the height of prosperity in the 1st century BC. The Treveri constructed a number of oppida, Iron Age fortified settlements, near the Moselle valley in what is now southern Luxembourg, western Germany and eastern France. Most of the archaeological evidence from this period has been discovered in tombs, many closely associated with Titelberg, a 50 ha site which reveals much about the dwellings and handicrafts of the period.\nThe Romans, under Julius Caesar, completed their conquest and occupation in 53 BC. The first known reference to the territory of present-day Luxembourg was by Julius Caesar in his \"Commentaries on the Gallic War\". The Treveri were more co-operative with the Romans than most Gallic tribes, and adapted readily to Roman civilization. Two revolts in the 1st century AD did not permanently damage their cordial relations with Rome.\nThe land of the Treveri was at first part of Gallia Celtica, but with the reform of Domitian in c. 90, was reassigned to Gallia Belgica.\nGallia Belgica was infiltrated by the Germanic Franks from the 4th century, and was abandoned by Rome in AD 406.\nThe territory of what would become Luxembourg by the 480s, became part of Merovingia Austrasia and eventually part of the core territory of the Carolingian Empire.\nWith the Treaty of Verdun (843), it fell to Middle Francia, and in 855, to Lotharingia. With the latter's division in 959, it then fell to the Duchy of Upper Lorraine within the Holy Roman Empire.\nCounty.\nThe history of Luxembourg properly began with the construction of Luxembourg Castle in the High Middle Ages. It was Siegfried I, count of Ardennes who traded some of his ancestral lands with the monks of the Abbey of St. Maximin in Trier in 963 for an ancient, supposedly Roman, fort named \"Lucilinburhuc\", commonly translated as \"little castle\". Modern historians link the etymology of the word with \"Letze\", meaning fortification, which may have referred to either the remains of a Roman watchtower or to a primitive refuge of the early Middle Ages.\nDuchy.\nFrom the Early Middle Ages to the Renaissance, Luxembourg bore multiple names, depending on the author. These include \"Lucilinburhuc\", \"Lutzburg\", \"L\u00fctzelburg\", \"Luccelemburc\", and \"Lichtburg\", among others. The Luxembourgish dynasty produced several Holy Roman Emperors, Kings of Bohemia, and Archbishops of Trier and Mainz.\nAround the fort of Luxembourg, a town gradually developed, which became the centre of a small but important state of great strategic value to France, Germany and the Netherlands. Luxembourg's fortress, located on a rocky outcrop known as the Bock, was steadily enlarged and strengthened over the years by successive owners. Some of these included the Bourbons, Habsburgs and Hohenzollerns, who made it one of the strongest fortresses on the European continent, the Fortress of Luxembourg. Its formidable defences and strategic location caused it to become known as the \u2018Gibraltar of the North\u2019.\nHabsburg (1477\u20131795) and French (1795\u20131815) rule.\nIn the 17th and 18th centuries, the electors of Brandenburg, later kings of Prussia (Borussia), advanced their claim to the Luxembourg patrimony as heirs-general to William of Thuringia and his wife Anna of Bohemia, the disputed dukes of Luxembourg in the 1460s. Anna was the eldest daughter of the last Luxembourg heiress. From 1609 onward, they had a territorial base in the vicinity, the Duchy of Cleves, the starting-point of the future Prussian Rhineland. This Brandenburger claim ultimately produced some results when some districts of Luxembourg were united with Prussia in 1813.\nThe first Hohenzollern claimant to descend from both Anna and her younger sister Elisabeth, was John George, Elector of Brandenburg (1525\u201398), his maternal grandmother having been Barbara Jagiellon. In the late 18th century, the younger line of Orange-Nassau (the princes who held sway in the neighbouring Dutch oligarchy) also became related to the Brandenburgers.\nIn 1598, the then possessor, Philip II of Spain, bequeathed Luxembourg and the other Low Countries to his daughter, the Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia and her husband Albert VII, Archduke of Austria. Albert was an heir and descendant of Elisabeth of Austria (d. 1505), queen of Poland, the youngest granddaughter of Sigismund of Luxembourg, the Holy Roman Emperor. Thus, Luxembourg returned to the heirs of the old Luxembourg dynasty of the line of Elisabeth. The Low Countries were a separate political entity during the couple's reign. After Albert's childless death in 1621, Luxembourg passed to his great-nephew and heir Philip IV of Spain.\nGovernance.\nIn the early 17th century, the Duchy was a Spanish possession administered from Brussels by an appointee of the Spanish King, at the same time as the other territories that formed the Spanish Netherlands. They held the title of Governor-General or Lieutenant Governor and were frequently a relative of the King.\nThe Governor-General was represented in Luxembourg by the Governor. They were surrounded by counsellors, who formed the Provincial Council, effectively the Duchy's government. However, as there was no separation of powers, the Provincial Council was also the main court of justice.\nThe Duchy was composed of administrative units that were very different in nature:\nFrom the 14th century, the inhabitants were represented by the Estates. This assembly comprised representatives of the three orders:\nAll the heads of noble families had the right to participate in sessions of the Estates, while the clergy were represented only by the heads of the largest abbeys: St. Maximin's Abbey of Trier, Echternach Abbey, M\u00fcnster Abbey, Orval Abbey, and Saint-Hubert Abbey. The secular clergy, the priests in the villages and towns, were therefore not included. A certain number of towns were represented. For the German-speaking part of the Duchy, this was Luxembourg, Echternach, Diekirch, Grevenmacher and Remich. Villages had no representation.\nFrench invasion.\nLuxembourg was invaded by Louis XIV of France (husband of Maria Theresa, daughter of Philip IV) in 1684, an action that caused alarm among France's neighbors and resulted in the formation of the League of Augsburg in 1686. In the ensuing War of the Grand Alliance, France was forced to give up the duchy, which was returned to the Habsburgs by the Treaty of Ryswick in 1697.\nDuring this period of French rule, the defences of the fortress were strengthened by the famous siege engineer Vauban. The French king's great-grandson Louis (1710\u201374) was, from 1712, the first heir-general of Albert VII. Albert VII was a descendant of Anna of Bohemia and William of Thuringia, having that blood through his mother's Danish great-great-grandmother, but was not the heir-general of that line. Louis was the first real claimant of Luxembourg to descend from both sisters, the daughters of Elizabeth of Luxembourg, the last Luxembourg empress.\nHabsburg rule was confirmed in 1715 by the Treaty of Utrecht, and Luxembourg was integrated into the Southern Netherlands. Emperor Joseph and his successor Emperor Charles VI were descendants of Spanish kings who were heirs of Albert VII. Joseph and Charles VI were also descendants of Anna of Bohemia and William of Thuringia, having that blood through their mother, although they were heirs-general of neither line. Charles was the first ruler of Luxembourg to descend from both sisters, daughters of Elisabeth of Bohemia.\nAustrian rulers were ready to exchange Luxembourg and other territories in the Low Countries. Their purpose was to round out and enlarge their power base, which in geographical terms was centred around Vienna. Thus, Bavarian candidate(s) emerged to take over the Duchy of Luxembourg, but this plan led to nothing permanent. Emperor Joseph II however, made a preliminary pact to make a neighbour of Luxembourg, Charles Theodore, Elector Palatine, as Duke of Luxembourg and king in the Low Countries, in exchange for his possessions in Bavaria and Franconia. However, this scheme was aborted by Prussia's opposition. Charles Theodore, who would have become Duke of Luxembourg, was genealogically a junior descendant of both Anna and Elisabeth, but the main heir of neither.\nDuring the War of the First Coalition, Luxembourg was conquered and annexed by Revolutionary France, becoming part of the \"d\u00e9partement\" of the For\u00eats in 1795. The annexation was formalised at Campo Formio in 1797. In 1798, Luxembourgish peasants started a rebellion against the French but it was rapidly suppressed. This brief rebellion is called the Peasant's War.\nDeveloping independence (1815\u20131890).\nLuxembourg remained more or less under French rule until the defeat of Napoleon in 1815. When the French departed, the Allies installed a provisional administration. Luxembourg initially came under the \"Generalgouvernement Mittelrhein\" in mid-1814, and then from June 1814 under the \"Generalgouvernement Nieder- und Mittelrhein\" (General Government Lower and Middle Rhine).\nThe Congress of Vienna of 1815, gave formal autonomy to Luxembourg. In 1813, the Prussians had already managed to wrest lands from Luxembourg, to strengthen the Prussian-possessed Duchy of Julich. The Bourbons of France held a strong claim to Luxembourg, whereas the Emperor Francis of Austria, on the other hand, had controlled the duchy until the revolutionary forces had joined it to the French republic. However, his Chancellor, Klemens von Metternich, was not enthusiastic about regaining Luxembourg and the Low Countries, as they were separated so far from the main body of the Austrian Empire.\nPrussia and the Netherlands, both claiming Luxembourg, made an exchange deal: Prussia received the Principality of Orange-Nassau, the ancestral Principality of the Prince of Orange in Central Germany; and the Prince of Orange in turn received Luxembourg. In 1815 Luxembourg joined the German Confederation and 1842 the German Customs Union.\nLuxembourg, somewhat diminished in size (as the medieval lands had been slightly reduced by the French and Prussian heirs), was augmented in another way through the elevation to the status of grand duchy and placed under the rule of William I of the Netherlands. This was the first time that the duchy had a monarch who had no claim to the inheritance of the medieval patrimony. However, Luxembourg's military value to Prussia prevented it from becoming a full part of the Dutch kingdom. The fortress, ancestral seat of the medieval Luxembourgers, was garrisoned by Prussian forces, following Napoleon's defeat, and Luxembourg became a member of the German Confederation with Prussia responsible for its defence, and a state under the suzerainty of the Netherlands at the same time.\nIn July 1819, a contemporary from Britain visited Luxembourg \u2014 his journal offers some insights. Norwich Duff, writes of its city that \"Luxembourg is considered one of the strongest fortifications in Europe, and \u2026 it appears so. It is situated in Holland (then as now used by English speakers as shorthand for the Netherlands) but by treaty is garrisoned by Prussians and 5,000 of their troops occupy it under a Prince of Hesse. The civil government is under the Dutch and the duties collected by them. The town is not very large but the streets are broader than [in] the French towns and clean and the houses are good... [I] got the cheapest of hot baths here at the principal house I ever had in my life: one franc.\"\nIn 1820, Luxembourg made use of the metric system of measurement compulsory. Previously, the country had using local units such as the \"malter\" (which was equivalent to 191 litres).\nMuch of the Luxembourgish population joined the Belgian revolution against Dutch rule. Except for the fortress and its immediate vicinity, Luxembourg was considered a province of the new Belgian state from 1830 to 1839. By the Treaty of London in 1839, the status of the grand duchy became fully sovereign and in personal union to the king of the Netherlands. In turn, the predominantly Oil-speaking geographically larger western part of the duchy was ceded to Belgium as the province de Luxembourg.\nThis loss left the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg a predominantly German state, although French cultural influence remained strong. The loss of Belgian markets also caused painful economic problems for the state. Recognising this, the grand duke integrated it into the German \"Zollverein\" in 1842. Nevertheless, Luxembourg remained an underdeveloped agrarian country for most of the century. As a result of this, about one in five of the inhabitants emigrated to the United States between 1841 and 1891.\nBeginning in the 1830s, Luxembourg came to develop its own national identity. The Catholic Church helped provide a sense of a unique cultural identity, and as early as 1840, Luxembourg had been granted its own diocese, and in 1870, a separate bishopric. Luxemburger Wort, which came to be the dominant national newspaper in Luxembourg, also had close links with the church. Patterns of language use further consolidated Luxembourgish nationality - while bilingualism prevailed, Luxembourgish became a language used in local literature and newspapers, especially when domestic issues and folklore were discussed; French was considered a language of diplomacy and was used when discussing international matters.\nCrisis of 1867.\nIn 1867, Luxembourg's independence was confirmed, after a turbulent period which even included a brief time of civil unrest against plans to annex Luxembourg to Belgium, Germany, or France. The crisis of 1867 almost resulted in war between France and Prussia over the status of Luxembourg, which had become free of German control when the German Confederation was abolished at the end of the Seven Weeks War in 1866.\nWilliam III, king of the Netherlands, and sovereign of Luxembourg, was willing to sell the grand duchy to France's Emperor Napoleon III in order to retain Limbourg but backed out when Prussian chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, expressed opposition. The growing tension brought about a conference in London from March to May 1867 in which the British served as mediators between the two rivals. Bismarck manipulated public opinion, resulting in the denial of sale to France. The issue was resolved by the second Treaty of London which guaranteed the perpetual independence and neutrality of the state. The fortress walls were pulled down and the Prussian garrison was withdrawn.\nFamous visitors to Luxembourg in the 18th and 19th centuries included the German poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, the French writers \u00c9mile Zola and Victor Hugo, the Hungarian composer Franz Liszt, and the English painter Joseph Mallord William Turner.\nSeparation and the World Wars (1890\u20131945).\nLuxembourg remained a possession of the kings of the Netherlands until the death of William III in 1890, when the grand duchy passed to the House of Nassau-Weilburg due to the 1783 Nassau Family Pact, under which those territories of the Nassau family in the Holy Roman Empire at the time of the pact (Luxembourg and Nassau) were bound by semi-Salic law, which allowed inheritance by females or through the female line only upon extinction of male members of the dynasty. When William III died leaving only his daughter Wilhelmina as an heir, the crown of the Netherlands, not being bound by the family pact, passed to Wilhelmina. However, the crown of Luxembourg passed to a male of another branch of the House of Nassau: Adolphe, the dispossessed Duke of Nassau and head of the branch of Nassau-Weilburg.\nBy the beginning of the 20th century, Luxembourg had abandoned its cultural ties to Germany in favour of developing its own nationalism - writers such as Nicolas Ries elevated the status of Luxembourgish to a literary language, and nationalist organisations such as the Letzeburger Nationalunio'n developed, espousing anti-German and anti-French sentiments. Luxembourgish was confirmed as an official and separate language by the Education Law of 1912, which established it as a mandatory school subject. The demographic patterns reversed, with more people immigrating to Luxembourg than emigrating from it, and the politics of Luxembourg had consolidated into three major parties - the socialists of Luxembourg Socialist Workers' Party, the liberals of the Liberal League, and the conservatives of the Rietspartei.\nFirst World War.\nThe internationally recognised neutrality of Luxembourg from the 1867 revised Treaty of London was violated in 1914 when Luxembourg was occupied by German troops, although the government was left intact and Luxembourg was not incorporated into the German state. While the government officially maintained its neutrality in spite of German occupation, the population sympathised with the Entente forces, and numbers of Luxembourgers joined the French army as a result. The political neutrality that the government maintained during the occupation was a cause of dissent and unrest; German occupation of Luxembourg caused widespread anti-German sentiment, and the monarchy was accused of collaborating with Germany, creating momentum in favour of its abolition. As a result, Marie-Ad\u00e9la\u00efde, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg abdicated in favour of her sister, Charlotte. Shortly thereafter, in 1919, a referendum was held wherein the public voted in favour of retaining the monarchy, which had become closely affiliated with the major political party, the Party of the Right, in turn having links to the Catholic Church. The war caused social upheaval, which laid the foundation for the first trades union in Luxembourg.\nInterwar period.\nThe end of the occupation in November 1918, squared with a time of uncertainty on the international and national levels. The victorious Allies disapproved of the choices made by the local \u00e9lites, and some Belgian politicians even demanded the (re)integration of the country into a greater Belgium. Within Luxembourg, a strong minority asked for the creation of a republic. In the end, the grand duchy remained a monarchy but was led by a new head of state, Charlotte. In 1921, it entered into an economic and monetary union with Belgium. During most of the 20th century, however, Germany remained its most important economic partner.\nThe introduction of universal suffrage for men and women favored the Rechtspartei (Party of the Right) which played the dominant role in the government throughout the 20th century, with the exception of 1925\u201326 and 1974\u201379, when the two other important parties, the Liberal and the Social-Democratic parties, formed a coalition. The success of the resulting party was due partly to the support of the church \u2014 the population was more than 90 percent Catholic \u2014 and of its newspaper, the \"Luxemburger Wort\".\nOn the international level, the interwar period was characterised by an attempt to put Luxembourg on the map. Especially under Joseph Bech, head of the Department of Foreign Affairs, the country participated more actively in several international organisations, in order to ensure its autonomy. On 16 December 1920 Luxembourg became a member of the League of Nations. On the economic level in the 1920s and the 1930s, the agricultural sector declined in favour of industry, but even more so for the service sector. The proportion of the active population in this last sector rose from 18 percent in 1907 to 31 percent in 1935.\nIn the 1930s, the internal situation deteriorated, as Luxembourgish politics were influenced by European left- and right-wing politics. The government tried to counter communist-led unrest in the industrial areas and continued friendly policies towards Nazi Germany, which led to much criticism. The attempts to quell unrest peaked with the \"Maulkuerfgesetz\", the \"muzzle\" Law, which was an attempt to outlaw the Communist Party. The law was turned down in a 1937 referendum.\nSecond World War.\nUpon the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, the government of Luxembourg observed its neutrality and issued an official proclamation to that effect on 6 September 1939. On 10 May 1940 an invasion by German armed forces swept away the Luxembourgish government and monarchy into exile. The German troops made up of the 1st, 2nd, and 10th Panzer Divisions invaded at 04:35. They did not encounter any significant resistance save for some bridges destroyed and some land mines since the majority of the Luxembourgish Volunteer Corps stayed in their barracks. Luxembourgish police resisted the German troops, but to little avail and the capital city was occupied before noon. Total Luxembourgish casualties amounted to 75 police and soldiers captured, six police wounded, and one soldier wounded.\nThe Luxembourg royal family and their entourage received visas from Portuguese consul Aristides de Sousa Mendes in Bordeaux. They crossed into Portugal and subsequently travelled to the United States in two groups: on the from Lisbon to Baltimore in July 1940, and on the Pan American airliner\" Yankee Clipper\" in October 1940. Throughout the war, Grand Duchess Charlotte broadcast via the BBC to Luxembourg to give hope to the people.\nLuxembourg remained under German military occupation until August 1942, when Nazi Germany formally annexed it as part of the \"Gau\" \"Moselland\". The German authorities declared Luxembourgers to be German citizens and called up 13,000 for military service. 2,848 Luxembourgers eventually died fighting in the German army. Luxembourg was fully incorporated into the Third Reich in 1942, which the German government justified by \u2018proclaiming\u2019 that Luxembourgers were ethnically and linguistically German.\nAn estimated 3,500 Jews lived in Luxembourg before the war; an estimated 1,000 to 2,500 were murdered in the Holocaust.\nLuxembourgish opposition to this annexation took the form of passive resistance at first, as in the \"\" (lit. \"War of the Pins\"), and in refusal to speak German. As French was forbidden, many Luxembourgers resorted to resuscitating old Luxembourgish words, which led to a renaissance of the language. The Germans met opposition with deportation, forced labour, forced conscription and, more drastically, with internment, deportation to Nazi concentration camps and execution. In October 1941, a census was administered, including questions on \"jetzige Staatsangeh\u00f6rigkeit\" (\u2018current citizenship\u2019), \"Muttersprache\" (\u2018mother tongue\u2019), and \"Volkszugeh\u00f6rigkeit\" (\u2018ethnicity\u2019). An overwhelming majority of the population answered these questions with \"L\u00ebtzebuergesch\", an act that showed the opposition to Luxembourg's incorporation into the Third Reich, while also emphasising that Luxembourg was not a part of the German nation. This rebellion against Nazi authority is referred to today as \"dr\u00e4imol L\u00ebtzebuergesch\" (\u2018three times Luxembourgish\u2019). Forced draft of the local population into the German army starting in 1942 resulted in the outbreak of numerous strikes, an event which is referred to today in collective terms as the Generalstreik.\nExecutions took place after the so-called general strike from 1 to 3 September 1942, which paralysed the administration, agriculture, industry and education in response to the declaration of forced conscription by the German administration on 30 August 1942. The Germans suppressed the strike violently. They executed 21 strikers and deported hundreds more to Nazi concentration camps. The then civilian administrator of Luxembourg, Gauleiter Gustav Simon, had declared conscription necessary to support the German war effort. The general strike in Luxembourg remained one of the few mass strikes against the German war machine in Western Europe.\nU.S. forces liberated most of the country in September 1944. They entered the capital city on 10 September 1944. During the Ardennes Offensive (Battle of the Bulge) German troops took back most of northern Luxembourg for a few weeks. Allied forces finally expelled the Germans in January 1945.\nBetween December 1944 and February 1945, the recently liberated city of Luxembourg was designated by the OB West (German Army Command in the West) as the target for V-3 siege guns, which were originally intended to bombard London. Two V-3 guns based at Lampaden fired a total of 183 rounds at Luxembourg. However, the V-3 was not very accurate. 142 rounds landed in Luxembourg, with 44 confirmed hits in the urban area, and the total casualties were 10 dead and 35 wounded. The bombardments ended with the American Army nearing Lampaden on 22 February 1945.\nAltogether, of a pre-war population of 293,000, 5,259 Luxembourgers lost their lives during the hostilities.\nModern history (since 1945).\nAfter World War II, Luxembourg abandoned its politics of neutrality, when it became a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the United Nations. It is a signatory of the Treaty of Rome, and constituted a monetary union with Belgium (Benelux Customs Union in 1948), and an economic union with Belgium and the Netherlands, the so-called BeNeLux.\nBetween 1945 and 2005, the economic structure of Luxembourg changed significantly. The crisis of the metallurgy sector, which began in the mid-1970s and lasted till the late 1980s, nearly pushed the country into economic recession, given the monolithic dominance of that sector. The Tripartite Coordination Committee, consisting of members of the government, management representatives, and trade union leaders, succeeded in preventing major social unrest during those years, thus creating the myth of a \u201cLuxembourg model\u201d characterised by social peace. Although in the early years of the 21st century Luxembourg enjoyed one of the highest GNI per capita in the world, this was mainly due to the strength of its financial sector, which gained importance at the end of the 1960s. Thirty-five years later, one-third of the tax proceeds originated from that sector. The harmonisation of the tax system across Europe could, however, seriously undermine the financial situation of the grand duchy.\nLuxembourg has been one of the strongest advocates of the European Union in the tradition of Robert Schuman. It was one of the six founding members of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1952 and of the European Economic Community (EEC) (later the European Union) in 1957; in 1999 it joined the euro currency area.\nEncouraged by the contacts established with the Dutch and Belgian governments in exile, Luxembourg pursued a policy of presence in international organisations. In the context of the Cold War, Luxembourg clearly opted for the West, having joined NATO in 1949. Engagement in European reconstruction was rarely questioned subsequently, either by politicians or by the greater population.\nDespite its small size, Luxembourg often played an intermediary role between larger countries. This role of mediator, especially between the two large and often bellicose nations of Germany and France, was considered one of the main characteristics of its national identity, allowing the Luxembourgers not to have to choose between one of these two neighbours. The country also hosted a large number of European institutions such as the European Court of Justice.\nLuxembourg's small size no longer seemed to be a challenge to the existence of the country, and the creation of the Central Bank of Luxembourg (1998) and of the University of Luxembourg (2003) was evidence of the continuing desire to become a \u201creal\u201d nation. The decision in 1984 to declare Luxembourgish the national language was also a step in the affirmation of the country's independence. In fact, the linguistic situation in Luxembourg was characterised by trilingualism: Luxembourgish was the spoken vernacular language, German the written language, in which Luxembourgers were most fluent, and French the language of official letters and law.\nBetween 1984 and 1986, the country became victim to a mysterious bombing spree, which was targeted mostly at electrical masts and other installations, without claiming any lives. The perpetrators of what would become known as the \"Bommel\u00eber Affair\" were never identified.\nIn 1995, Luxembourgish Prime Minister Jacques Santer was appointed president of the European Commission as a compromise candidate after the nomination of Belgian Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene was vetoed by John Major. Santer and his commission later had to resign in March 1999 over corruption accusations against some commission members.\nPrime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker, followed this European tradition. On 10 September 2004, Juncker became the president of the group of finance ministers from the 12 countries that share the euro, a role that led him to be dubbed \"Mr Euro\".\nOn 24 December 1999, Grand Duke Jean announced his decision to abdicate the Luxembourgish throne in favour of his son, Henri, who had already served as regent since 4 March 1998. Henri was sworn in as Grand Duke on 7 October 2000, ending the 36-year reign of Jean, over which Luxembourg had seen major transformations.\nOn 10 July 2005, after Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker had threatened to resign in case of a victory of the \"no\" vote, the proposed European Constitution was approved by 56.52% of voters in a referendum.\nIn November 2012, RTL and d'L\u00ebtzebuerger Land made allegations concerning misconduct and disorganisation within the State Intelligence Service (SREL), including the transcript of a covertly recorded 2008 conversation between Juncker and SREL head Marco Mille which mentioned links between Grand Duke Henri, MI6 and the Bommel\u00eber Affair. The Chamber of Deputies then opened a parliamentary inquiry which revealed further misconduct, including illegal wiretapping operations, and concluded that Juncker should bear political responsibily for the SREL's actions. After the LSAP pulled from Juncker's coalition government on 10 July 2013, he announced his resignation and the organisation of a snap election. \nFollowing the election, although Juncker's CSV remained the largest party, a coalition between the DP, LSAP and the Greens was formed, with the CSV entering the opposition for the first time since 1979. The DP's Xavier Bettel was sworn in as prime minister on 4 December 2013, succeeding Juncker - who at the time was the EU's longest serving leader - and becoming the world's third openly gay head of government.\nIn July 2014, the European Parliament elected Juncker as President of the European Commission, making him the third Luxembourger to hold the post. He succeeded Portugal's Jos\u00e9 Manuel Barroso, who had held the post since 2004, on 1 November 2014.\nFollowing the narrow victory of his liberal-led coalition in the 2018 general election, Xavier Bettel was sworn in for a second term in December of that year. The following year was marked by the death of Grand Duke Jean on 23 April 2019 at age 98, which was followed by a 12-day period of national mourning and a funeral at Luxembourg Cathedral.\nOn 29 February 2020, in accordance with its 2018 coalition accord, the Bettel II Government implemented free public transport across Luxembourg, making it the first country in the world to implement the measure nationwide.\nThe October 2023 general election was marked by a sharp electoral defeat for the Greens, which failed to compensate for the DP and LSAP's gains and led to the Bettel II Government losing its majority. With the CSV having once again won the most seats, its leader, former minister Luc Frieden, who returned to politics after a decade-long hiatus, was invited to form a government. The CSV formed a coalition with the DP, with Frieden being sworn in as Prime Minister on 17 November and Bettel remaining in government as Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister.\nSee also.\nGeneral:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17831", "revid": "41719756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17831", "title": "Geography of Luxembourg", "text": " \nLuxembourg is a small country located in the Low Countries, part of North-West Europe. It borders Belgium for to the west and north, France () to the south, and Germany () to the east. Luxembourg is landlocked, separated from the North Sea by Belgium.\nThe topography of the country is divided very clearly between the hilly \u00c9islek of the northern third of the Grand Duchy and the flat Gutland, which occupies the southern two-thirds. The country's longest river is the Sauer, which is a tributary of the Moselle, the basin of which includes almost all of Luxembourg's area. Other major rivers include the Alzette in the south and the Wiltz in the north.\nThe capital, and by far the largest city, is Luxembourg City, which is located in the Gutland, as are most of the country's main population centres, including Esch-sur-Alzette, Dudelange, and Differdange. Besides Luxembourg City, the other main towns are primarily located in the southern Red Lands region, which lines the border between Luxembourg and France to the south.\nPhysical geography.\nTopography.\nDespite its small size, Luxembourg has a varied topography, with two main features to its landscape. The northern section of the country is formed by part of the plateau of the Ardennes, where the mountain heights range from . The rest of the country is made up of undulating countryside with broad valleys. The capital, Luxembourg City, is located in the southern part of the country.\nGreen heart of Europe.\nBecause the soil is so difficult to cultivate, most of the land is used for cattle pasture. The Ardennes region also includes the Upper S\u00fbre National Park, an important conservation area and a hiker's retreat.\nSouth of the S\u00fbre River, the country is known as the Gutland. The region covers slightly over two-thirds of the country.\nThe terrain gently rises and falls with an average height of . Agriculture is the main activity as term Gutland arises from the fertile soil and warm, dry summers experienced is this part of the Duchy compared to the \u00c9islek region.\nAs a result, vegetables and fruit, such as strawberries, apples, plums, and cherries, are grown in large quantities. River erosion in this area has created deep gorges and caves, resulting in some spectacular scenery.\nIn the extreme south of the country lies \"the land of the red rocks\" \u2013 a reference to the deposits of minerals found here. Rich in iron ore, the district has been a mining and heavy industrial region since Roman if not earlier times and stretches for over . The tall chimneys of the iron and steel works are typical landmarks of the industrial south. To the east lies the grape-growing valley of the Moselle. Numerous villages nestle in the deep valleys and behind the vineyards along the river banks. Most villages have at least one winery. Also in the east is the \"Little Switzerland\" area, characterized by wooded glens and ravines in unusual rock formations.\nRivers and lakes.\nLuxembourg has a number of minor rivers, such as the Eisch, the Alzette, and the P\u00e9trusse, but the main river is the Moselle with its tributaries-the S\u00fbre and the Our. Together, their courses serve as a natural boundary between Luxembourg and Germany. Along their banks, many of the country's medieval castles can be found.\nThe Moselle actually rises in northeast France and flows north through Luxembourg for to join the mighty Rhine at Koblenz, Germany. The Moselle is long, and is navigable, due to canalization for . Green slopes, covered with vines, flank the meandering course of the river.\nRising in Belgium, the S\u00fbre River flows for in an easterly direction through Luxembourg and into the Moselle. Its sinuous course essentially cuts Luxembourg from east to west. The Our River, flowing along the northeastern border, is a tributary of the S\u00fbre. Its valley is surrounded by unspoiled countryside.\nThe Upper S\u00fbre lake is the largest stretch of water in the Grand Duchy. Surrounded by luxuriant vegetation and peaceful creeks, the lake is a centre for water sports, such as sailing, canoeing, and kayaking. Such outdoor activities, which has made it an attractive spot for tourists, have led to the growth of a local crafts industry.\nThe town of Esch-sur-S\u00fbre nestles at one end of the lake. Immediately above it, the river has been dammed to form a hydroelectric reservoir extending some up the valley. The Upper S\u00fbre dam was built in the 1960s to meet the country's drinking water requirements\nExtreme points.\nElevation extremes:\n\"lowest point:\"\nMoselle at Wasserbillig - 133 m\n\"highest point:\"\nKneiff near Wilwerdange - 560 m\nEnvironment.\nClimate.\nLuxembourg is part of the West European Continental climatic region, and enjoys a temperate climate without extremes. Winters are mild, summers fairly cool, and rainfall is high.\nSeasonal weather is somewhat different between the northern and southern regions. In the north there is considerable influence from the Atlantic systems, in which the passage of frequent pressure depressions gives rise to unstable weather conditions. This results in overcast skies and considerable drizzle in the winter.\nRainfall reaches a year in some areas. In the summer, excessive heat is rare and temperatures drop noticeably at night. Low temperatures and humidity make for what those living in this part of the country call, optimistically, an \"invigorating climate\".\nIn the south, although the rainfall is not significantly low, at around , and the winters no milder, the principal difference is in the higher summer temperatures, especially in the Moselle Valley. Crops, especially wine grapes, thrive here. With a mean annual temperature of , the sunniest months are May to August. In the spring, the countryside is a riot of wildflowers and blossoms.\nFlora.\nLuxembourg's flora is characterized by the country's location at the border between the Atlantic-European and Central-European climate zones. In the north, beech and oak trees are plentiful. The oak trees can grow up to , with a diameter of . They supply large quantities of excellent hardwood timber because of their strength.\nAlong the riverbanks, species like the black alder and willows can be found. Alder wood is pale yellow to reddish brown, fine-textured and durable even under water. It is also an important timber tree mainly because of its disease-resistant properties. Willow trees can reach a height of , and are valued for ornamental purposes.\nThe narrow, deeply incised valleys of the north also provide a habitat for rare plants and animals, especially the European otter, a protected species. In the industrial south, among the abandoned quarries and deserted open pit mines, nature has reclaimed her own, and there are flowers everywhere.\nInternational agreements.\n\"Party to:\"\nAir Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands\n\"Signed, but not ratified:\"\nAir Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea\nGeographical statistics.\nGeographic coordinates:\nArea:\n\"total:\"\n2 586\u00a0km2\n\"land:\"\n2 586\u00a0km2\n\"water:\"\n0\u00a0km2\nNatural resources:\niron ore (no longer exploited), arable land\nLand use:\n\"arable land:\"\n23.9%\n\"permanent crops:\"\n0.56%\n\"other:\"\n75.52% (2011)\nIrrigated land:\n10\u00a0km2 (including Belgium) (1993 est.)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n3.1\u00a0km3\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17832", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17832", "title": "Demographics of Luxembourg", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographic features of the population of Luxembourg include population density, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nThe following is an overview of the demographics of Luxembourg. Demographic topics include basic statistics, most populous cities, and religious affiliation.\nThe population of Luxembourg as of 1 January 2024 was 672,050 (52.7% Luxembourgers and 47.3% of foreign nationality).\nThe people of Luxembourg are called Luxembourgers.\nPopulation size and structure.\nThe population of Luxembourg in 2024 is 672,050.\nAge structure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021): \nVital statistics.\nThe following table chronicles factors such as population, birth rates, and death rates in Luxembourg since 1900.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nFertility.\nIn 2020, 64% of children born in Luxembourg were to mothers of foreign origin, both from other EU member states and from non-EU countries.\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nNationality.\nLuxembourg does not formally collect ethnic or racial data of its citizens. The foreign population resident in Luxembourg currently numbers over 313,407, corresponding to 47.43% of the total population (compared to 13.2% in 1961). That means there are currently almost as many immigrants as there are native citizens. These immigrants are overwhelmingly nationals of EU countries (accounting for over 80%), by far the greater part of whom originally come from Portugal, Italy and the two neighbouring countries, France and Belgium. For some years, there has also been a large increase in the number of immigrants and asylum seekers from the countries of Eastern Europe, and especially the new republics to have emerged from the former Yugoslavia (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, and Montenegro). These immigrants include a considerable proportion of young people. Immigrants (especially asylum seekers) have a strong impact on the birth rate, accounting for nearly 50% of births in Luxembourg. The population of Ukrainian immigrants increased dramatically following the 2022 invasion of Ukraine, representing nearly a percent of the total population as of 2023.\nA more detailed breakdown by nationality shows that the Portuguese community is still the largest group, accounting for around 30% of the foreign population. The Italian population has been stable for the past ten years at approximately 20,000. Some 80,000 foreigners come from bordering countries (France, Belgium and Germany).\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nLanguage.\nThe linguistic situation in Luxembourg is complicated. The \"national language\" is Luxembourgish, a West Germanic language based on the same German dialect as in the neighbouring part of Germany. Three languages are used by the administration: Luxembourgish, French and German. French is the only language of legislation.\nAccording to the census of 2011, the residents of Luxembourg answer very differently about their use of language, depending on the context (see table).\nReligion.\nThe predominant religion of the Luxembourg population is Roman Catholic, with Protestant, Anglican, Jewish, Muslim and Hindu minorities. According to a 1979 law, the government forbids collection of data on religious practices, but over 90% is estimated to be baptized Catholic (the Virgin Mary is the Patroness of the city of Luxembourg).\nThe Lutherans are the largest Protestant denomination in the country. Muslims are estimated to number approximately 6,000 persons, notably including 1,500 refugees from Montenegro; Orthodox (Albanian, Greek, Montenegrin, Serbian, Russian, and Romanian) adherents are estimated to number approximately 5,000 persons, along with approximately 1,000 Jews. Freedom of religion is provided by the Luxembourg Constitution."}
{"id": "17833", "revid": "1315232587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17833", "title": "Politics of Luxembourg", "text": " \nLuxembourg is a parliamentary representative democratic monarchy, whereby the prime minister is the head of government, and the multi-party system. Executive power is under the constitution of 1868, as amended, exercised by the government, by the grand duke and the Council of Government (cabinet), which consists of a prime minister and several other ministers. Usually, the prime minister is the leader of the political party or coalition of parties having the most seats in parliament. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nLegislative power is vested in the Chamber of Deputies, elected directly to five-year terms.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Luxembourg a \"full democracy\" in . According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Luxembourg was 2023 the 9th most electoral democratic country in the world.\nRecent political history.\nSince the end of World War II, the Christian Social People's Party (CSV) has been the senior partner in all governing coalitions with two exceptions: between 1974\u201379 (DP\u2013LSAP coalition) and between 2013-2023 (DP\u2013LSAP\u2013Green coalition). The Catholic-oriented CSV resembles Christian democratic political parties in other West European nations, and enjoys broad popular support making it the strongest party in the country and the second strongest in those regions where it is not the \"number one\".\nThe Democratic Party (DP) is a social-liberal party, drawing support from self-employed persons, the business community and the urban upper-middle class. Like other West European liberal parties, it advocates a mixture of basic social legislation and minimum government involvement in the economy. It is strongly pro-NATO and defends the idea of a secular state in which religion should not play any role in public life. The DP had been a junior partner in coalition governments with the CSV in 1979\u20131984 and 1999\u20132004, and senior partner in a coalition government with the LSAP in 1974\u20131979. The traditional stronghold of the party is the City of Luxembourg, the \"Buergermeeschter\" (Mayor) of the nation's capital coming usually from the ranks of the DP.\nThe Luxembourg Socialist Workers' Party (LSAP) is a party of social-democratic orientation which has been a junior partner in most governments since 1974 either with the CSV in 1984\u20131999 and 2004\u20132013, or the Democratic Party in 1974\u20131979. Its stronghold lies in the industrial belt in the south of the country (the \"Minette Region\", which is mainly the canton of Esch). Since the elections of October 2023 it has been in opposition.\nThe Greens have received growing support since it was officially formed in 1983. It opposes both nuclear weapons and nuclear power and supports environmental and ecological preservation measures. This party generally opposes Luxembourg's military policies, including its membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.\nThe Alternative Democratic Reform Party (ADR) is a national conservative political party. It endorses a softly eurosceptic line and advocates and promotes intensely the preservation and use of the Luxembourgish language. It is sometimes described as a mildly populist right-wing party.\nThe Left is a democratic socialist party. It was formed in 1999. It won its first seat in the Chamber of Deputies in 1999. It currently holds two seats in the Chamber and has done so since 2013.\nThe Pirate Party Luxembourg was formed in October 2009. It won its first two seats in the Chamber of Deputies in 2018 with 6.45% of the vote.\nThe Communist Party (KPL), which received 10%\u201318% of the vote in national elections from World War II to the 1960s, won two seats in the 1984 elections, one in 1989, and none in 1994. The last election it won a seat in Luxembourg's national legislature was in 1999 with 3.3% of the vote. It lost this single seat in 2004 and has held no seats in Luxembourg's national legislature since. It also holds no seats in the EU Parliament. Its small remaining support lies in the heavily industrialised south.\nIn the June 2004 parliamentary elections, the CSV won 24 seats, the LSAP 14, the DP 10, the Greens 7, and the Alternative Democratic Reform Party 5. The Left and the Communist Party each lost its single seat in part due to their separate campaigns. The Democratic Party which had become the junior coalition partner in 1999 registered heavy losses. The long-reigning CSV was the main winner, partly due to the personal popularity of the prime minister Jean-Claude Juncker (CSV). In July 2004, it chose the LSAP as its coalition partner. Jean Asselborn (LSAP) was appointed as the Vice Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Immigration. In 2013, the CSV lost one seat (23 seats instead of 24).\nA complete list of all governments is maintained on the website of the Government of Luxembourg.\nIn 2008, the bitter controversy over euthanasia had parliament pass a measure which would restrict the legislative veto powers of the grand duke, who had opposed the pro-euthanasia law on the grounds of his personal moral standards based on the Christian faith, a problem of private conscience very similar to what had occurred in Belgium in the early 1990s when King Baudouin expressed his opposition to a law liberalizing abortion.\nIn July 2013, Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker announced his resignation following a secret service scandal. He had been prime minister since 1995.\nIn December 2013, openly gay Xavier Bettel was sworn in as the new prime minister to succeed Juncker. Bettel of Democratic Party (DP), formed a coalition of Liberals, Social Democrats and Greens who won a combined majority of 32 out of 60 seats in Luxembourg's snap election on 20 October 2013. However, Juncker's Christian Democrats (CSV) remained the biggest party with 23 seats.\nIn July 2014, European Parliament elected former Luxembourg prime minister Jean-Claude Juncker as the President of the European Commission on 1 November 2014, succeeding Portugal's Jose Manuel Barroso, who had held the post since 2004.\nIn December 2018, Prime Minister Xavier Bettel was sworn in for a second term, following the narrow victory of his liberal-led coalition in 2018 parliamentary election.\nOn 12 July the Luxembourg Parliament supported the expansion of NATO.\nIn October 2023, the Christian Social People\u2019s Party (CSV) won the general election, meaning Prime Minister Xavier Bettel\u2019s ruling liberal coalition lost its clear majority. In November 2023, Luc Frieden, leader of CSV, became new Prime minister of Luxembourg. He formed a coalition with the liberal Democratic Party (DP), meaning outgoing Prime Minister Xavier Bettel remained in government as foreign minister and deputy prime minister.\nExecutive branch.\nLuxembourg has a parliamentary form of government with a constitutional monarchy operating according to absolute primogeniture.\nAccording to the constitution of 1868, executive power is exercised by the Grand Duke or Grand Duchess and the cabinet, which consists of a prime minister and a variable number of government branch ministers. \nThe Grand Duke has the power to dissolve the legislature and reinstate a new one. However, since 1919, sovereignty has resided with the nation.\nThe monarchy is hereditary within the ruling dynasty of \"Luxembourg-Nassau\".\nThe prime minister and vice prime minister are appointed by the monarch, following popular elections to the Chamber of Deputies. All government members are responsible to the Chamber of Deputies. The government is currently a coalition of the CSV and DP.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Chamber of Deputies (Luxembourgish: \"D'Chamber\"; French: \"Chambre des D\u00e9put\u00e9s\") has 60 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation in four multi-seat constituencies.\nThe Council of State (Luxembourgish: \"Staatsrot\"; French: \"Conseil d'\u00c9tat\") is an advisory body composed of 21 citizens (usually politicians or senior public servants with good political ties) proposed, in order by the Government, Parliament and the Council of State and appointed by the Grand Duke. Traditionally the heir of the throne is also one of its members. Its role is to advise the Chamber of Deputies as well as the Government in the drafting of legislation and government regulations. The function of the councilor ends after a continuous or discontinuous period of twelve years or when the relevant person reaches the age of seventy-two. The responsibilities of the members of the Council of State are extracurricular to their normal professional duties.\nJudicial branch.\nLuxembourgish civil law is based upon the Code Napol\u00e9on with numerous updates, modernization, and modifications. The apex of the judicial system is the Superior Court of Justice (Luxembourgish: \"Iewechte Geriichtshaff\"; French: \"Cour Sup\u00e9rieure de Justice\"), whose judges are appointed by the Grand Duke. The same goes for the Administrative Court (Luxembourgish: \"Verwaltungsgeriicht\"; French: \"Cour Administrative\").\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Grand Duchy is divided into twelve cantons:\nTwo judicial districts: \nFour electoral constituencies (multi-seated):\nMilitary.\nLuxembourg's contribution to its defense and to NATO consists of a small but well-equipped army of volunteers of Luxembourgish and foreign nationality. Its operational headquarters are at the Haerebierg Military Center in Diekirch.\nBeing a landlocked country, it has no navy. It also has no air force. According to an agreement with neighboring Belgium, its airspace is protected by the Belgian Air Force.\nAlso, 18 NATO Airborne Warning And Control System (AWACS) airplanes are registered as aircraft of Luxembourg based on a decision of the NATO Authorities.\nInternational organization membership.\nLuxembourg is a member of ACCT, Australia Group, Benelux, CE, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EIB, EMU, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, Zangger Committee\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17834", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17834", "title": "Economy of Luxembourg", "text": "Luxembourg has a developed economy largely dependent on the banking, steel, and industrial sectors. Citizens of Luxembourg enjoy the highest per capita gross domestic product in the world, according to an IMF estimate in 2022. Among OECD nations, Luxembourg has a highly efficient and strong social security system; social welfare expenditure stood at roughly 21.9% of GDP.\nPrior to the mid-19th century, Luxembourg was primarily rural and mostly isolated from commerce with neighboring economies. In the late 19th century, Luxembourg's dominant sector was steel industry. Over time, the main economic sector became finance. Due to its reputation for secrecy, it has become an attractive location for individuals and businesses to hold assets for tax avoidance and tax evasion purposes.\nHistory.\nFrom 1715 to 1791, Luxembourg was under Austrian rule. At the time, it was predominantly rural. It has been described as largely isolated. It had no road connections to Brussels, which limited its ability to trade with neighbors. Towards the end of the 18th century, long-distance paved roads were constructed, which integrated Luxembourg with neighboring markets.\nThe first land survey in Luxembourg was conducted after a decree by Maria-Theresa in 1766. The land survey was part of a broader reform effort to abolish certain feudal privileges and encourage more egalitarianism.\nFull abolition of feudalism in Luxembourg took place in 1795 when Luxembourg was made part of the French revolutionary regime. It was part of Napoleonic France until 1815 when the Congress of Vienna gave the Eastern part of Luxembourg to Prussia while the remainder formed the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg under Dutch rule. Under Dutch rule, new taxes and customs tariffs were introduced, which harmed commerce in Luxembourg and contributed to it remaining a rural country.\nThe 1839 Treaty of London divided part of Luxembourg into a province of newly independent Belgium while the remainder became the independent Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. During the first half of the 19th century, Luxembourg remained rural, although there was an emergence of a textile industry. In the second half of the 19th century, Luxembourg developed a steel industry, which would become the dominant sector. \nSectors.\nIn 2013 the GDP was $60.54 billion of which services, including the financial sector, produced 86%. The financial sector comprised 36% of GDP, industry comprised 13.3% and agriculture only 0.3%.\nThe financial center.\nBanking.\nBanking is the largest sector in the Luxembourg economy. In the 2019 Global Financial Centres Index, Luxembourg was ranked as having the 25th most competitive financial center in the world, and third most competitive in Europe after London and Z\u00fcrich. The country has specialised in the cross-border fund administration business. As Luxembourg's domestic market is relatively small, the country's financial centre is predominantly international. At the end of March 2009, there were 152 banks in Luxembourg, with over 27,000 employees. Political stability, good communications, easy access to other European centres, skilled multilingual staff, a tradition of banking secrecy and cross-border financial expertise have all contributed to the growth of the financial sector. These factors have contributed to a Corruption Perceptions Index of 8.3 and a DAW Index ranking of 10 in 2012; the latter the highest in Europe. Germany accounts for the largest-single grouping of banks, with Scandinavian, Japanese, and major US banks also heavily represented. Total assets exceeded \u20ac929 billion at the end of 2008. More than 9,000 holding companies are established in Luxembourg. The European Investment Bank\u2014the financial institution of the European Union\u2014is also located there.\nLuxembourg enterprises expected negative investment in 2023 due to slowing economic growth and tighter monetary policy. The net balance of enterprises anticipating an increase in investment minus those expecting a fall is negative at -4%, far lower than the EU average of 14%.\nHoldings.\nSince the Holding Act of 1929, Luxembourg has been an attractive location for tax avoidance. A network of lawyers, bankers and political elites have since then maintained an infrastructure of regulatory codes, legal expertise and shell companies that enable tax avoidance. Concern about Luxembourg's banking secrecy laws, and its reputation as a tax haven, led in April 2009 to it being added to a \"grey list\" of nations with questionable banking arrangements by the G20, a list from which it was removed in 2009. This concern has led Luxembourg to modify its tax legislation to avoid conflict with the tax authorities of European Union Members. For example, the classic tax exempt 1929 Holding Company was outlawed 31 December 2010, as it was deemed an illegal state aid by the European Commission.\nNearly 90 percent of companies operating in Luxembourg are foreign. Approximately 40 percent of Luxembourg companies do not engage in any meaningful economic activity in Luxembourg: they just hold assets in Luxembourg.\nThe early beginnings of the financial center.\nContrary to the belief of a large number of national historians, the financial center of Luxembourg was not a product that simply saw success out of nowhere in the 70s. In their article, Calabrese and Majerus argue that the Holding Law of 1929 (H29) was more than just a historical side note, but rather a foundation that laid the future of the country\u2019s financial success. In essence the law was a legal tool that would help companies in avoiding double taxation on financial assets, mainly by creating a dummy corporations and profiting from the low taxes the country offered for these kinds of companies. The newly introduced Holding regime was successful. Within a span of three years, the capital estimations for the holding companies not only met but exceeded expectations, reaching a total surpassing 2 billion Luxembourg francs. Among the biggest holdings was The Ford Investment Company set up in early 1930. The Holding, enabled by the legislation, could avoid UK tax on the dividends of its subsidiary companies in Europe. This type of company could however, also be used to loan money or make investments, like in the case of Ford by buying factories for European subsidiaries for example. The Law was accompanied by the creation of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange a year earlier, which would constitute another important institution to round off the construction of a national financial center. In the interwar period, the role these Holding companies played as a source of revenue started to materialize. While the discussions on the adoption of the Holding Law saw opposition members argue against it, discussions on later modifications on the Law would not see a strong opposition anymore due to its contribution to the state\u2019s tax revenues.\nH29 also enabled the creation of networks and practices. Following its implementation, Luxembourg experienced the establishment of a network involving lawyers, banks, and notaries closely associated with the local political elite. This network successfully developed and maintained an infrastructure comprising regulatory codes, legal expertise, and shell companies, rendering it appealing within the European market for tax avoidance. Additionally, H29 majorly contributed to the establishment of a legal framework that would pave the way for the future use of investment funds, by establishing a positive reputation among investors and proving itself to be a competent key-player on the market. As a result, Luxembourg was chosen in 1963 to list the first and a large part of the Eurobonds on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange, a choice that only could have been made with the awareness of a financial center that could keep up with others such as London, which were also used in the case of Eurobonds.\nConsequently, the Holding Law of 1929 had a large and long lasting impact on the construction of a domestic financial place, an impact that should not be disregarded when presenting the economic history of the country.\nSteel.\nA key event in the economic history of Luxembourg was the 1876 introduction of English metallurgy. The refining process led to the development of the steel industry in Luxembourg and founding of the Arbed company in 1911.\nThe restructuring of the industry and increasing government ownership in ARBED (31%) began as early as 1974.\nIn 2001, Arbed merged with Aceralia and Usinor to form Arcelor, which, in 2007, merged with Mittal Steel Company to form ArcelorMittal.\nTelecommunications.\nGovernment policies promote the development of Luxembourg as an audiovisual and communications center. Radio-Television-Luxembourg is Europe's premier private radio and television broadcaster. The government-backed Luxembourg satellite company SES (formerly Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Europ\u00e9enne des Satellites) was created in 1986 to install and operate a satellite telecommunications system for transmission of television programs throughout Europe. The first SES Astra satellite, the 16-channel RCA 4000 Astra 1A, was launched by the Ariane Rocket in December 1988. SES presently [when?] constitutes the world largest satellite services company in terms of revenue.\n67% of Luxembourg enterprises use innovative digital technologies. Luxembourg firms choose robots (74%), IoT (43%), and digital platforms (42%), over other digital technologies.\nTourism.\nTourism is an important component of the national economy, representing about 8.3% of GDP in 2009 and employing some 25,000 people or 11.7% of the working population. Despite the current crisis, the Grand Duchy still welcomes over 900,000 visitors a year who spend an average of 2.5 nights in hotels, hostels or on camping sites. Business travel is flourishing representing 44% of overnight stays in the country and 60% in the capital, up 11% and 25% between 2009 and 2010.\nAgriculture.\nLuxembourg's small but productive agricultural sector is highly subsidized, mainly by the EU and the government. It employs about 1\u20133% of the workforce. Most farmers are engaged in dairy and meat production. Vineyards in the Moselle Valley annually produce about 15 million litres of dry white wine, most of which is consumed within Luxembourg and also in Germany, France, and Belgium on a lesser scale.\nData.\nIn 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Luxembourg is Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate with 89,748 companies followed by Services and Retail Trade with 31,658 and 6,571 companies respectively.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017. Inflation under 2% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEnergy.\nIn 1978, Luxembourg tried to build a 1,200 MW nuclear reactor but dropped the plans after threats of major protests.\nLuxembourg uses imported oil and natural gas for the majority of its energy generation.\nSpaceflight and space resource extraction.\nLuxembourg is a member of the European Space Agency\nwhere Luxembourg contributed 23 million Euros in 2015.\nThe world's biggest satellite operator (SES) has its origin and headquarters in Betzdorf, Luxembourg.\nIn February 2016, the Government of Luxembourg announced that it would attempt to \"jump-start an industrial sector to mine asteroid resources in space\" by, among other things, creating a \"legal framework\" and regulatory incentives for companies involved in the industry.\nBy June 2016, announced that it would \"invest more than US$ in research, technology demonstration, and in the direct purchase of equity in companies relocating to Luxembourg.\" By April 2017, three space mining corporations had established headquarters in Luxembourg.\nLuxembourg's new law took effect in August 2017, ensuring that private operators can be confident about their rights on resources they extract in space. The law provides that space resources can be owned by anyone, not just by Luxembourg citizens or companies.\"\nTransportation.\nLuxembourg has efficient road, rail and air transport facilities and services. The road network has been significantly modernised in recent years with 147\u00a0km of motorways connecting the capital to adjacent countries. The advent of the high-speed TGV link to Paris has led to renovation of the city's railway station while a new passenger terminal at Luxembourg Airport has recently been opened. The airport has known a sustained growth in passenger numbers during the last years (2015: 2.7 mio, 2020 : 4 mio expected), and the second stage of expansion is on its way.\nTrams have been reintroduced to the capital (first core line operative in end 2017) and further lines are planned, including a tram/light-rail to Esch-sur-Alzette. In 2019, almost all public transport was made free to use for both residents and visitors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17835", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17835", "title": "Telecommunications in Luxembourg", "text": " \nLuxembourg is recognized for establishing local television and radio stations abroad. The RTL Group, originating from Luxembourg, operates in numerous countries. Additionally, Luxembourg is the base for SES, a leading global satellite operator.\nIn the 2022 Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI), among the 27 European Union (EU) members, Luxembourg is placed 6th in Human Capital, with 64% of its population possessing basic digital skills, exceeding the EU average of 54%. Additionally, in Information and Communication Technology (ICT), the country mirrors the EU average with 20% female ICT specialists. For Connectivity, it ranks 11th, with 91% uptake in fixed broadband and 96% in mobile broadband, both figures exceeding the EU averages of 78% and 87%, respectively. The country is 18th in Integration of Digital Technology, as Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) show a 54% digital intensity level, slightly below the EU average of 55%. In Digital Public Services, Luxembourg ranks 7th with an e-government user rate of 79%, exceeding the EU's 65%.\nInternet.\nFixed broadband.\nLuxembourg's fixed broadband sector exhibits a 91% uptake rate, exceeding the EU's 78% average. Additionally, 63% of Luxembourg households have access to broadband speeds of at least 100 Mbps, above the EU's 41%. The country's digital infrastructure includes 96% coverage in very high capacity networks (VHCN) and 75% in fibre to the premises (FTTP), both higher than the EU averages of 70% and 50%, respectively.\nMobile broadband.\nThe country demonstrates solid performance in mobile broadband with an uptake rate of 96%, higher than the EU average of 87%. The country is advancing its 5G capabilities, achieving an assigned 5G spectrum of 61%, slightly above the EU average of 56%. However, 5G coverage lags behind, with a notably lower coverage rate of 13% compared to the EU average of 66%\nDigital public services.\nIn the domain of digital public services, Luxembourg ranks 7th within the EU. Notably, 79% of the country's internet users actively utilize e-government solutions, representing a significant increase compared to the prior year and to the EU average of 65%. This accomplishment is attributed to the \"Electronic Governance 2021-2025\" strategy, jointly developed by the Ministry for Digitalisation and the Government IT Centre (CTIE), with the goal of facilitating the transition to a digital government model. Luxembourg actively promotes innovation and modernization through initiatives such as the Guichet.lu portal, electronic authentication certificates, and the introduction of numerous online administrative procedures. The country continues its efforts to enhance open data availability, currently standing at 66%, which is below the EU average of 81%.\nTelevision and radio.\nLuxembourg maintains a pan-European broadcasting presence through the RTL Group, offering a wide array of radio and television services, especially in France, Germany, and the UK. The nation hosts SES, Europe's leading satellite operator, managing the Astra satellite fleet. Locally, outlets such as RTL Tele Letzebuerg and Nordliicht TV provide content for Luxembourg's audiences, while radio platforms like RTL Radio Letzebuerg and EldoRadio present diverse programming. Luxembourg's media landscape benefits from constitutional protections for freedom of speech and the press."}
{"id": "17836", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17836", "title": "Transport in Luxembourg", "text": " \nTransport in Luxembourg is ensured principally by road, rail and air. There are also services along the river Moselle which forms the border with Germany. The road network has been significantly modernised in recent years with motorways to adjacent countries. The advent of the high-speed TGV link to Paris has led to renovation of the capital's main railway station while a new Schengen-only passenger terminal at Luxembourg Airport opened in 2017. Trams in the capital were reintroduced in December 2017 and there are plans for light-rail and/or tram-train lines in adjacent areas.\nAll public transport in Luxembourg (buses, trams, and trains) has been free to use since 29 February 2020, as part of a larger mobility experiment with goals to increase walking for short trips, increase bicycling, and increase the transit ridership sharply as the network is enlarged and service frequency is increased.\nRailways.\nOperated by Chemins de Fer Luxembourgeois (CFL), Luxembourg's railways form the backbone of the country's public transport network, linking the most important towns. The total length of operational (standard gauge) track is , though it was some at the end of the Second World War. There are regular services from Luxembourg City to Ettelbruck, Esch-sur-Alzette, Wasserbillig and Kleinbettingen while international routes extend to Trier, Koblenz, Brussels, Li\u00e8ge, Metz and Nancy.\nThe railway network links into Belgium, Germany and France. Some of the cross-border services are run by CFL, others by SNCF, NMBS/SNCB and DB.\nThere is now a frequent high-speed connection to Paris via the LGV Est line. EuroCap-Rail is a proposed high-speed axis connecting Brussels, Luxembourg (city), and Strasbourg.\nRoads.\nRoad network.\nThe six Luxembourg motorways cover a total distance of , linking the capital with Trier (Germany), Thionville (France) and Arlon (Belgium) as well as with Esch-sur-Alzette and Ettelbruck in Luxembourg. Luxembourg's motorways are toll free. The speed limit is normally , in rainy weather. With of motorway per , Luxembourg probably now has the highest density of motorways in Europe.\nLuxembourg City is a major business and financial center. Many workers prefer to live in the three neighboring countries and drive to work each day. This creates huge traffic jams during peak commuting hours. Tailbacks on the E411 motorway can extend five or more kilometers into Belgium and can take an hour or more to navigate.\nThe remaining road network in Luxembourg accounts for a total length of , consisting of of trunk roads (RN or \"routes nationales\") and of secondary roads (CR or \"chemins repris\").\nBus services.\nComprehensive bus services linking the towns and villages of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg are contracted out to private operators by the RGTR (R\u00e9gime g\u00e9n\u00e9ral des transports routiers) under the Ministry of Transport.\nLuxembourg City is served by 250 of its own AVL (Autobus de la Ville de Luxembourg) buses transporting some 40 million passengers per year (2018). 170 of these are, as with the RGTR, contracted out to private operators. Most of these buses are in AVL colors but the owner's name is often mentioned on them in small print. Also, the letters on the license plate can give ownership away to those that know how that system works. There are 31 regular bus routes plus special bus services through the night.\nThe TICE or Syndicat des Tramways Intercommunaux dans le Canton d\u2019Esch/Alzette operates several bus routes. They are centered on the city of Esch-sur-Alzette in the southeast of the country. Most are urban and suburban routes but some extend into the surrounding countryside.\nCFL, the Luxembourg railway company, operates some 17 bus routes, mainly serving towns and villages that are no longer served by rail.\nA number of smaller cities like Ettelbruck and Wiltz have started their own local services, some of which reach out to nearby villages. These services are not part of the RGTR and national tickets are not always honored.\nAll transport companies work together under the \"Verk\u00e9iersverbond\", which covers all bus, tram, and train routes. Starting from 29 Feb 2020, all public transport was made free throughout the territory of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, funded through general taxation. However first class tickets can still be purchased for use on the trains: a ticket valid for 2 hours is \u20ac3, whilst a one-day ticket is \u20ac6.\nCycling.\nIn the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the EV5 Via Romea Francigena runs and follows a network of dedicated cycle paths from the Belgian border, through to its cliff-top capital city, and towards the French and German borders at Schengen. The EV5 follows the following national routes in Luxembourg: PC18, PC17, PC12, PC13, the Luxembourg-City route no. 10, PC1, PC11, PC7 and PC3.\nIn Luxembourg, the EV5 goes through Strassen, Luxembourg, Hesperange and Schengen. It then passes through back to France.\nTrams.\nLuxembourg City's historic tramway network closed in 1964 as part of a general decline of trams across Europe, but the city reintroduced trams at the end of 2017 with the construction of a new tram line (T1) opening in a phased approach. The final leg opened in March 2025. The line connects Luxembourg Airport to the EU institutions on the Kirchberg plateau, the city centre, Luxembourg Station, the new Cloche d'Or business district and national stadium. Additional lines are foreseen, both in Luxembourg City, and extending to Esch-sur-Alzette as part of Luxembourg's National Mobility Plan 2035.\nWater.\nThe river Moselle forms a natural border between Luxembourg and Germany in the southeast of the country. In the summer months, the Princess Marie-Astrid and a few other tourist boats operate regular services along the river.\nMertert near Grevenmacher on the Moselle is Luxembourg's only commercial port. With two quays covering a total length of , it offers facilities connecting river, road and rail transport. It is used principally for coal, steel, oil, agricultural goods and building materials. In 2016, the port handled 1.2 million tonnes of cargo.\nAir.\nLuxembourg Airport at Findel, some to the north of the city, is Luxembourg's only commercial airport. Thanks to its long runway (4,000 m), even large types of aircraft are able to use its facilities.\nLuxair, Luxembourg's international airline, and Cargolux, a cargo-only airline, operates out of the airport. In 2008, the airport ranked as Europe's 5th largest and the world's 23rd by cargo tonnage.\nLuxair has regular passenger services to 20 European destinations and operates tourist flights to 17 more. Other airlines operating flights to and from Luxembourg include British Airways, KLM, Scandinavian Airlines, Swiss Global Air Lines, and TAP Portugal.\nA large new airport terminal building was opened in 2008 with more modern facilities, including an underground carpark. In order to accommodate anticipated growth in travel within the Schengen Area, in 2016 an abandoned terminal was renovated to handle low-capacity and regional flights.\nPipelines.\nThe trunk natural gas pipelines in Luxembourg have a total length of (2007).\nRussia and Norway are the main producers. The Luxembourg network is connected to Germany, France and Belgium.\nMerchant navy.\nLuxembourg has 150 vessels in its merchant navy. These include 4 bulk carriers, 1 container ship, 21 general cargo ships, 3 oil tankers, and 121 others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17837", "revid": "13451522", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17837", "title": "Luxembourg Armed Forces", "text": "National military force of Luxembourg\nThe Luxembourg Armed Forces (; ) are the national military force of Luxembourg. The army has been a fully volunteer military since 1967. As of 2024, it has 1,197 personnel.\nThe army is under civilian control, with the grand duke as commander-in-chief. The minister for defence, currently Yuriko Backes, oversees army operations. The professional head of the army is the Chief of Defence, who answers to the minister and holds the rank of general. Current office holder is general Steve Thull.\nLuxembourg has provided military personnel for UN, NATO and EU peacekeeping missions since 1992. It has been a member of Eurocorps since 1994.\nHistory.\nMilitia (1817\u20131841).\nOn 8 January 1817, William I, Grand Duke of Luxembourg, published a constitutional law governing the organization of a militia, the main provisions of which were to remain in force until the militia was abolished in 1881. The law fixed the militia's strength at 3,000 men. Until 1840, Luxembourg's militiamen served in units of the Royal Netherlands Army. Enlisted men served for five years: the first year consisted of active service, but during each of the subsequent four years of service they were mobilised only three times per year.\nFederal Contingent (1841\u20131867).\nIn 1839, William I became a party to the Treaty of London by which the Grand-Duchy lost its western, francophone territories to the Belgian province of Luxembourg. Due to the country's population having been halved, with the loss of 160,000 inhabitants, the militia lost half its strength. Under the terms of the treaty, Luxembourg and the newly formed Duchy of Limburg, both members of the German Confederation, were together required to provide a federal contingent consisting of a light infantry battalion garrisoned in Echternach, a cavalry squadron in Diekirch, and an artillery detachment in Ettelbruck. In 1846, the cavalry and artillery units were disbanded and the Luxembourg contingent was separated from that of Limburg. The Luxembourg contingent now consisted of two light infantry battalions, one in Echternach and the second in Diekirch; two reserve companies; and a depot company.\nIn 1866, the Austro-Prussian War resulted in the dissolution of the German Confederation. Luxembourg was declared neutral in perpetuity by the 1867 Treaty of London, and in accordance, its fortress was demolished in the following years. In 1867, the Prussian garrison left the fortress, and the two battalions of Luxembourg light infantry entered the city of Luxembourg that September.\nA new military organization was established in 1867, consisting of two battalions, known as the , having a total strength of 1,568 officers and men. In 1868, the contingent came to consist of one light infantry battalion of four companies, with a strength of 500 men. On 16 February 1881, the light infantry battalion was disbanded with the abolition of the militia-based system.\nGendarmes and Volunteers Corps.\nOn 16 February 1881, the (Corps of Gendarmes and Volunteers) was established. It was composed of two companies, a company of gendarmes and one of volunteers. In 1939, a corps of auxiliary volunteers was established and attached to the company of volunteers. Following the occupation of Luxembourg by Germany in May 1940, recruitment for the company of volunteers continued until 4 December 1940, when they were moved to Weimar, Germany, to be trained as German police.\nIn November 1918 Luxembourg faced two small communist rebellions in Luxembourg City and Esch-sur-Alzette. Both were quickly suppressed by police. In December 1918 a group of soldiers attempted a mutiny in the Luxembourg City barracks.\nOn 9 January 1919, a group of socialist and liberal deputies, tabled a motion to make Luxembourg a republic. A crowd gathered at the barracks of the Corps of Volunteers, close to the Chamber. Then \u00c9mile Servais, a left-wing politician, walked out the Chamber, addressed the crowd and demanded a republic. The crowd then rushed the Chamber and the deputies called in the Corps of Volunteers but the soldiers refused the orders to disperse the crowd. Part of the deputies then fled the Chamber. The remaining deputies, mainly left-wing, formed the Committee of Public Safety with Servais as its leader. The committee had no public support and the French Army under the command of General de La Tour soon quelled the turmoil.\nLuxembourg Battery.\nIn 1944 during World War II, the Luxembourg Government, while exiled in London, made agreements for a group of seventy Luxembourg volunteers to be assigned to the Artillery Group of the 1st Belgian Infantry Brigade, commonly known as Brigade Piron, Jean-Baptiste Piron being the chief of this unit. This contingent was named the Luxembourg Battery. Initially, it was built up and trained by two Belgian officers. Later, from August 1944, these were joined by Luxembourg officers, who had received training in Britain.\nSeveral Luxembourg NCOs and half of the country's troops had fought in North Africa in the French Foreign Legion. The rest were people who had escaped from Luxembourg, and young men evading forcible conscription into the Wehrmacht by fleeing to Britain. The Luxembourg unit landed in Normandy on 6 August 1944\u2014at approximately the same time as the Dutch Princess Irene Brigade and the French 2nd DB (\"division blind\u00e9e\") commanded by General Leclerc\u2014two months after the D-Day landings.\nThe Luxembourg Battery was equipped with four Ordnance QF 25 pounder howitzers, which were named after the four daughters of Grand Duchess Charlotte: Princesses Elisabeth, Marie Adelaide, Marie Gabriele and Alix.\nPost-liberation.\nConscription was introduced in Luxembourg for the first time in November 1944. In 1945, the (Grand Ducal Guard Corps) garrisoned in the Saint-Esprit barracks in Luxembourg City and the 1st and 2nd infantry battalions were established, one in Walferdange and the other in Dudelange. The Luxembourg Armed Forces took charge of part of the French occupation zone in Germany, the 2nd Battalion occupying part of the Bitburg district and a detachment from the 1st Battalion part of the Saarburg district. The 2nd Battalion remained in Bitburg until 1955. The strength of the army rose to 2,150 men. Luxembourg signed the Treaty of Brussels in March 1948, and the North Atlantic Treaty in 1949.\nSetting up an army after the war proved more difficult than predicted. To a certain extent, the authorities could rely on escaped German conscripts and Luxembourgers who had joined Allied armies; however, they had to find a way to train officers. Initially, British military advisers came to Luxembourg, where training was carried out by British officers and NCOs. But officer training, in the long term, would have to be done in military schools abroad. Belgium and France were both interested in helping and offered solutions. In the end, the government opted for a compromise solution, by sending some officer cadets to the in France and others to the Royal Military Academy in Belgium. This eventually led to disunity within the Luxembourg officer corps due to differences in training and promotion.\nIn 1951, the Grand Ducal Guard relocated to Walferdange and integrated with the . The Guard had special units for reconnaissance, radiac reconnaissance, and anti-air warfare. From 1955, it was organised into a headquarters company, a garrison platoon, a reconnaissance company and two training companies. In 1959, the was disbanded and the Grand Ducal Guard was integrated into the (Territorial Command). The force was reduced to a single company, a corporals' training school, and a weapons platoon. In 1960, the Grand Ducal Guard was again reorganised into four platoons, temporarily grouped into intervention and reinforcement detachments. In 1964, the Grand Ducal Guard was organized into a HQ, three platoons, a reinforcement platoon, and the NCO school. On 28 February 1966, the Grand Ducal Guard was officially disbanded.\nKorean War.\nIn 1950, seventeen countries, including Luxembourg, decided to send armed forces to assist the Republic of Korea. The Luxembourg contingent was incorporated into the Belgian United Nations Command or the Korean Volunteer Corps. The Belgo-Luxembourgish battalion arrived in Korea in 1951, and was attached to the US 3rd Infantry Division. Two Luxembourger soldiers were killed and 17 were wounded in the war. The Belgo-Luxembourg battalion was disbanded in 1955.\nGroupement Tactique R\u00e9gimentaire and Home Command.\nIn 1954, the (GTR) (Regimental Tactical Group) was established as Luxembourg's contribution to NATO. It consisted of three infantry battalions, an artillery battalion, and support, medical, transport, signals, engineering, heavy mortar, reconnaissance, and headquarters companies. By 1954, its overall strength had risen to 5,200 men. The GTR was disbanded in 1959.\nIn addition to the GTR, the Army also included the Territorial Command, composed of headquarters, military police, movement and transportation companies, a static guard battalion, and a mobile battalion. By 1954, it numbered some 2,500 men. At the same date, some 2.45 percent of the country's population was serving in the military.\n1st Artillery Battalion.\nIn 1961, the 1st Artillery Battalion was placed at NATO's disposal. The battalion was organised into three batteries, each with six field howitzers (British 25 pounder guns converted to 105\u00a0mm caliber) from the former GTR artillery battalion, an HQ battery, and a service battery. In 1963, the battalion was attached to the US 8th Infantry Division. In 1966, the Grand Ducal Guard was disbanded and its tasks were transferred to and performed by the 1st Artillery Battalion until it too was disbanded, in 1967.\n1st Infantry Battalion.\nCompulsory military service was abolished in 1967 by which time some 34,700 men had served at some point in the Luxembourg Army. As part of a major reorganisation of the military, the 1st Infantry Battalion was established, consisting of a headquarters and services unit, two motorized infantry companies, and a reconnaissance company with two reconnaissance (recce) platoons and an anti-tank platoon. From 1968 onwards, it formed a part of NATO's ACE Mobile Force (Land) (AMF(L)). In 1985, a reinforced company\u2014consisting of an AMF Company with two recce platoons and an anti-tank platoon, a forward air-control team, a national support element for logistics, and a medical support element\u2014replaced the battalion. In 2002 the AMF(L) was dissolved.\nRecent international operations.\nLuxembourg started financially supporting international peacekeeping missions in 1991, citing the Persian Gulf War, Rwanda and in Albania. Luxembourg has been deploying military personnel for peacekeeping missions since 1992.\nLuxembourg has contributed troops to the UNPROFOR from April 1992 to August 1993, deploying in total 40 military personnel in a Belgian bataillon. In 1996 Luxembourg contributed to IFOR missions in former Yugoslavia in a multinational transport company. This was followed by a small contingent in the NATO SFOR mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, completing 9 personnel rotations. The Luxembourg Armed Forces were integrated into the Multinational Beluga Force under Belgian command.\nLuxembourg has contributed over 18 years in NATO KFOR, totalling 1200 military personnel. Luxembourg deployed a reconnaissance platoon first from 2000 to 2006 under Belgian command and from 2007 to 2011 under a French detachment. From 2011 to 2017 Luxembourg was subordinated to the headquarters in Pristina, collaborating with an Austrian reconnaissance company.\nTogether with Belgium, Luxembourg contributed military personnel to UNIFIL in Lebanon from 2006 to 2014.\nOver 35 rotations, Luxembourg troops have been deployed to Afghanistan from 2003 to 2014 to support ISAF in Kabul and Kandahar. The army has also participated in humanitarian relief missions such as setting up refugee camps for Kurds and providing emergency supplies to Albania. Furthermore, Luxembourg participated in the RSM in Mazar-i-Sharif from 2015 to 2021 and provided evacuation support during the August 2021 Taliban offensive in Kabul.\nThe Luxembourg Armed Forces have also been active in Africa, supporting the EU Security Reform Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (EUSEC RDC), the EU Military Operation in Eastern Chad and North Eastern Central African Republic (EUFOR Chad/CAR), following with the MINURCAT. From 2013 to 2022 Luxembourg provided support to EUTM in Mali.\nLuxembourg is also active in the NATO eFP, contributing logistical and satellite transmission support in Lithuania since 2017.\nLuxembourg Armed Forces Organization.\nThe army is under civilian control, with the Grand Duke as Commander-in-Chief. The Minister for Defence oversees army operations. The professional head of the army is the Chief of Defence, currently Steve Thull, who answers to the minister. The Grand Duke and the Chief of Defence are the only generals, with colonels as Deputy Chief of Defence and head of the Military Training Centre.\nUntil 1999, the army was integrated into the (Public Force), which included the Gendarmerie and the Police, until the Gendarmerie was merged with the Grand Ducal Police under a different minister in 2000. The army has been an all-volunteer force since 1967. It has a strength of around 900 professional soldiers and 200 civilians with a total budget of approximately $389 million, or 0.57% of GDP in 2021.\nThe Luxembourg Army is a battalion-sized formation with four separate (companies) under the control of the (Military Centre), located in the Caserne Grand-Duc Jean barracks on Herrenberg hill near the town of Diekirch. Luxembourg has no navy, as the country is landlocked. It has an air force since 2021 and an aircraft.\nCompagnie A.\nCompagnie A, the first of two rifle companies that forms the Luxembourg contingent of the Eurocorps, is normally integrated into the Belgian contribution during operations. As such, it participates in Eurocorps' contribution to the NATO Response Force (entire company) and the EU Battlegroups (one platoon). The company consists of a command element and three reconnaissance platoons of four sections each, plus a command section. Each section is equipped with two armoured M1114 HMMWVs, each armed with a .50 caliber M2 Browning machine gun. The command section has a MAN X40 truck in addition to its pair of HMMWVs.\nCompagnie B.\nCompagnie B, currently known as the Reconversion Service, is the educational unit of the Army, providing various educational courses for personnel to take in preparation for advancement. On 19 May 2011, Company B was redesignated as the (Reconversion Service) with the mission to prepare volunteer soldiers for the return to civilian life. The service includes the (Army School). In order to attend this school a soldier must have at least eighteen months of service. The school is divided into two sections:\nCompagnie C.\nCompagnie C, better known as the (Staff &amp; Instruction Company), is the main military training unit of the Luxembourg Armed Forces, with instruction given in:\nThis company is also responsible for the army's Elite Sports Section, reserved for sportsmen in the Army. Following their basic training, these soldiers join the (SSEA).\nCompagnie D.\nCompagnie D is the second rifle company \u2013 it provided Luxembourg's contribution to NATO's ACE Mobile Force (Land) (disbanded in 2002) as the Luxembourg Reconnaissance Company. Luxembourg's participation in various UN, EU, and NATO missions is drawn from Compagnie D, which mirrors Compagnie A in organisation, with a command element and three reconnaissance platoons.\nAircraft of the Luxembourg Air Wing.\nRetired aircraft.\nPrevious aircraft operated were 3 Piper PA-18 Super Cub's from 1952 to 1968.\nUniform.\nLuxembourg military uniforms consist of dress, service (or garrison) and field uniforms, often worn with a black beret. Dress uniforms are worn mostly on formal occasions, while service uniforms are worn for daily duty. Luxembourg Armed Forces uniforms consist of service and field attire for summer and winter, as well as a dress uniform and mess jacket for officers. The winter service dress uniform, of olive drab wool, consists of a single-breasted coat having patch pockets with flaps, a khaki shirt and tie, and trousers that are usually cuffless. The summer uniform is similar, but made of light tan material.\nCombat uniforms use either a temperate or desert camouflage pattern resembling the Finnish M05 pattern. These patterns were adopted in 2010\u201311 to replace the U.S. Woodland pattern used since 1985.\nGrades.\nOfficers.\nThose who have completed high school will enter a special thirteen-week basic training in the Army as warrant officers, then attend the military officer school for five years (normally in Brussels, Belgium), before becoming a lieutenant in the Luxembourg Armed Forces.\nAspiring officers are sent to the Belgian \u00c9cole Royale Militaire in Brussels, or the Ecole Sp\u00e9ciale Militaire de Saint-Cyr in France. After the first two years at these schools, officer-cadets receive the title of lieutenant.\nAfter leaving the military academy, officer candidates become probationary officers for a period of twenty-four months. The probation period consists of specialised military-branch training at a school abroad, and practical service within one of the Army's units. If they succeed during this probation, their appointment as lieutenants is made permanent.\nNCOs.\nThose who have completed five years of high school and have served four months as voluntary soldiers, will do a nine-month stage at the Infantry Training Department of the Belgian Army in Arlon, before becoming sergeants in the Luxembourg Armed Forces.\nCareer Corporals.\nThose who have not completed five years of high school may, after three years of service, become career corporals in the Luxembourg Armed Forces, if they pass physical and mental tests. They also have to pass a part of the NCO School in Belgium.\nMilitary industry.\nLuxembourg has a law permitting companies to only produce such material for the armed forces (domestic or foreign) that is not a lethal weapon. As lethal weapon production is banned, Luxembourg Armed Forces sources its weapons from abroad. Luxembourg does however have some production of military and dual-use equipment that are not lethal weapons; about 75 firms in Luxembourg produce (directly or indirectly) material that armed forces use. Such equipment is for example armored rescue vehicles (inter alia ambulances) and drones. Luxembourg has been growing its defense industry after Russian attack on Ukraine and discussion about modifying the lethal weapons ban have taken place.\nSpace.\nLuxembourg has a satellite in orbit, the GovSat-1, which is used in military communications. Luxembourg has 4 dedicated government/military satellite communications ground stations. Luxembourg's satellite communications work in co-operation with NATO allies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17838", "revid": "50921080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17838", "title": "Foreign relations of Luxembourg", "text": "The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has long been a prominent supporter of European political and economic integration. In 1921, Luxembourg and Belgium formed the Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU) to create an inter-exchangeable currency and a common customs regime. Post-war, Luxembourg became a founding member state of the United Nations, and dropped its policy of neutrality to become a founding member state of NATO. Luxembourg expanded its support for European integration, becoming a founding member state of the Benelux Economic Union (today's Benelux Union), and one of the \"inner six\" founding member states of the three European Communities; the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom), and the European Economic Community (EEC). Subsequently, Luxembourg became a founding member state of the European Union (EU) when the EEC and ECSC were incorporated into it in 1993. Luxembourg is a founding member of the Schengen Area, abolishing internal borders amongst its member states, named after the Luxembourg village where the original agreement \u2014 since incorporated into EU law \u2014 was signed in 1985. At the same time, the majority of Luxembourgers have consistently believed that European unity makes sense only in the context of a dynamic transatlantic relationship, and thus have traditionally pursued a pro-NATO, pro-US foreign policy.\nLuxembourg is the site of the European Court of Justice, the European Investment Bank, the European Court of Auditors, the secretariat of the European Parliament, the Statistical Office of the European Commission (Eurostat), and other EU bodies.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Luxembourg maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17839", "revid": "41219559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17839", "title": "London Underground", "text": "Rapid transit system in England\nThe London Underground (also known simply as the Underground or as the Tube) is a rapid transit system serving Greater London and some parts of the adjacent home counties of Buckinghamshire, Essex and Hertfordshire in England. It is part of the network of transport services managed by Transport for London.\nThe Underground has its origins in the Metropolitan Railway, opening on 10 January 1863 as the world's first underground passenger railway. Despite sulfurous fumes, the line was a success from its opening, carrying 9.5 million passengers in the first year of its existence. The Metropolitan is now part of the Circle, District, Hammersmith &amp; City and Metropolitan lines. The first line to operate underground electric traction trains, the City &amp; South London Railway in 1890, is now part of the Northern line.\nThe network has expanded to 11 lines with of track. However, the Underground does not cover most southern parts of Greater London; there are only 33 Underground stations south of the River Thames. The system's 272 stations collectively accommodate up to 5million passenger journeys a day. In 2023/24 it was used for 1.181 billion passenger journeys.\nThe system's first tunnels were built just below the ground, using the cut-and-cover method; later, smaller, roughly circular tunnels\u2014which gave rise to its nickname, the Tube\u2014were dug through at a deeper level. Despite its name, only 45% of the system is under the ground: much of the network in the outer environs of London is on the surface.\nThe early tube lines, originally owned by several private companies, were brought together under the Underground brand in the early 20th century, and eventually merged along with the sub-surface lines and bus services in 1933 to form \"London Transport\" under the control of the London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB). The current operator, London Underground Limited (LUL), is a wholly owned subsidiary of Transport for London (TfL), the statutory corporation responsible for the transport network in London. As of 2015[ [update]], 92% of operational expenditure is covered by passenger fares. The Travelcard ticket was introduced in 1983 and Oyster card, a contactless ticketing system, in 2003. Contactless bank card payments were introduced in 2014, the first such use on a public transport system.\nThe LPTB commissioned many new station buildings, posters and public artworks in a modernist style. The schematic Tube map, designed by Harry Beck in 1931, was voted a national design icon in 2006 and now includes other transport systems besides the Underground, such as the DLR, London Overground, Thameslink, the Elizabeth line, and Tramlink. Other famous London Underground branding includes the roundel and the Johnston typeface, created by Edward Johnston in 1916.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nSub-surface lines.\nThe idea of an underground railway linking the City of London with the urban centre was proposed in the 1830s, and the Metropolitan Railway was granted permission to build such a line in 1854. To prepare construction, a short test tunnel was built in 1855 in Kibblesworth, a small town with geological properties similar to London. This test tunnel was used for two years in the development of the first underground train, and was later, in 1861, filled up. The world's first underground railway, it opened in January 1863 between Paddington and Farringdon using gas-lit wooden carriages hauled by steam locomotives. It was hailed as a success, carrying 38,000 passengers on the opening day, and borrowing trains from other railways to supplement the service. The Metropolitan District Railway (commonly known as the District Railway) opened in December 1868 from South Kensington to Westminster as part of a plan for an underground \"inner circle\" connecting London's main-line stations. The Metropolitan and District railways completed the Circle line in 1884, built using the cut and cover method. Both railways expanded, the District building five branches to the west reaching Ealing, Hounslow, Uxbridge, Richmond and Wimbledon and the Metropolitan eventually extended as far as Verney Junction in Buckinghamshire \u2013 more than from Baker Street and the centre of London.\nDeep-level lines.\nFor the first deep-level tube line, the City and South London Railway, two diameter circular tunnels were dug between King William Street (close to today's Monument station) and Stockwell, under the roads to avoid the need for agreement with owners of property on the surface. This opened in 1890 with electric locomotives that hauled carriages with small opaque windows, nicknamed \"padded cells\". The Waterloo and City Railway opened in 1898, followed by the Central London Railway in 1900, known as the \"twopenny tube\". These two ran electric trains in circular tunnels having diameters between and , whereas the Great Northern and City Railway, which opened in 1904, was built to take main line trains from Finsbury Park to a Moorgate terminus in the City and had diameter tunnels.\nWhile steam locomotives were in use on the Underground there were contrasting health reports. There were many instances of passengers collapsing whilst travelling, due to heat and pollution, leading for calls to clean the air through the installation of garden plants. The Metropolitan even encouraged beards for staff to act as an air filter. There were other reports claiming beneficial outcomes of using the Underground, including the designation of Great Portland Street as a \"sanatorium for [sufferers of ...] asthma and bronchial complaints\", tonsillitis could be cured with acid gas and the Twopenny Tube cured anorexia.\nElectrification.\nWith the advent of electric Tube services (the Waterloo and City Railway and the Great Northern and City Railway), the Volks Electric Railway, in Brighton, and competition from electric trams, the pioneering Underground companies needed modernising. In the early 20th century, the District and Metropolitan railways needed to electrify and a joint committee recommended an AC system, the two companies co-operating because of the shared ownership of the inner circle. The District, needing to raise the finance necessary, found an investor in the American Charles Yerkes who favoured a DC system similar to that in use on the City &amp; South London and Central London railways. The Metropolitan Railway protested about the change of plan, but after arbitration by the Board of Trade, the DC system was adopted.\nUnderground Electric Railways Company era.\nYerkes soon had control of the District Railway and established the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) in 1902 to finance and operate three tube lines, the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway (Bakerloo), the Charing Cross, Euston and Hampstead Railway (Hampstead) and the Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway, (Piccadilly), which all opened between 1906 and 1907. When the \"Bakerloo\" was so named in July 1906, \"The Railway Magazine\" called it an undignified \"gutter title\". By 1907 the District and Metropolitan Railways had electrified the underground sections of their lines.\nIn January 1913, the UERL acquired the Central London Railway and the City &amp; South London Railway, as well as many of London's bus and tram operators. Only the Metropolitan Railway, along with its subsidiaries the Great Northern &amp; City Railway and the East London Railway, and the Waterloo &amp; City Railway, by then owned by the main line London and South Western Railway, remained outside the Underground Group's control.\nA joint marketing agreement between most of the companies in the early years of the 20th century included maps, joint publicity, through ticketing and UD signs, incorporating the first bullseye symbol, outside stations in Central London. At the time, the term Underground was selected from three other proposed names; \"Tube\" and \"Electric\" were both officially rejected. Ironically, the term Tube was later adopted alongside the Underground. The Bakerloo line was extended north to Queen's Park to join a new electric line from Euston to Watford, but the First World War delayed construction and trains reached Watford Junction in 1917. During air raids in 1915 people used the tube stations as shelters. An extension of the Central line west to Ealing was also delayed by the war and was completed in 1920. After the war, government-backed financial guarantees were used to expand the network and the tunnels of the City and South London and Hampstead railways were linked at Euston and Kennington; the combined service was not named the Northern line until later. The Metropolitan promoted housing estates near the railway with the \"Metro-land\" brand and nine housing estates were built near stations on the line. Electrification was extended north from Harrow to Rickmansworth, and branches opened from Rickmansworth to Watford in 1925 and from Wembley Park to Stanmore in 1932. The Piccadilly line was extended north to Cockfosters and took over District line branches to Harrow (later Uxbridge) and Hounslow.\nLondon Passenger Transport Board era.\nIn 1933, most of London's underground railways, tramway and bus services were merged to form the London Passenger Transport Board, which used the London Transport brand. The Waterloo &amp; City Railway, which was by then in the ownership of the main line Southern Railway, remained with its existing owners. In the same year that the London Passenger Transport Board was formed, Harry Beck's diagrammatic tube map first appeared.\nIn the following years, the outlying lines of the former Metropolitan Railway closed, the Brill Tramway in 1935, and the line from Quainton Road to Verney Junction in 1936. The 1935\u201340 New Works Programme included the extension of the Central and Northern lines and the Bakerloo line to take over the Metropolitan's Stanmore branch. The Second World War suspended these plans after the Bakerloo line had reached Stanmore and the Northern line High Barnet and Mill Hill East in 1941. Following bombing in 1940, passenger services over the West London line were suspended, leaving Olympia exhibition centre without a railway service until a District line shuttle from Earl's Court began after the war. After work restarted on the Central line extensions in east and west London, these were completed in 1949.\nDuring the war many tube stations were used as air-raid shelters. They were not always a guarantee of safety however; on 11 January 1941 during the London Blitz, a bomb penetrated the booking hall of Bank Station, the blast from which killed 111 people, many of whom were sleeping in passageways and on platforms. On 3 March 1943, a test of the air-raid warning sirens, together with the firing of a new type of anti-aircraft rocket, resulted in a crush of people attempting to take shelter in Bethnal Green Underground station. A total of 173 people, including 62 children, died, making this both the worst civilian disaster in Britain during the Second World War, and the largest loss of life in a single incident on the London Underground network.\nLondon Transport Executive and Board era.\nOn 1 January 1948, under the provisions of the Transport Act 1947, the London Passenger Transport Board was nationalised and renamed the London Transport Executive, becoming a subsidiary transport organisation of the British Transport Commission, which was formed on the same day. Under the same act, the country's main line railways were also nationalised, and their reconstruction was given priority over the maintenance of the Underground and most of the unfinished plans of the pre-war New Works Programme were shelved or postponed.\nThe District line needed new trains and an unpainted aluminium train entered service in 1953, this becoming the standard for new trains. In the early 1960s, the Metropolitan line was electrified as far as Amersham, British Railways providing services for the former Metropolitan line stations between Amersham and Aylesbury. In 1962, the British Transport Commission was abolished, and the London Transport Executive was renamed the London Transport Board, reporting directly to the Minister of Transport. Also during the 1960s, the Victoria line was dug under central London and, unlike the earlier tunnels, did not follow the roads above. The line opened in 1968\u201371 with the trains being driven automatically and magnetically encoded tickets collected by automatic gates gave access to the platforms.\nGreater London Council era.\nOn 1 January 1970, responsibility for public transport within Greater London passed from central government to local government, in the form of the Greater London Council (GLC), and the London Transport Board was abolished. The London Transport brand continued to be used by the GLC.\nOn 28 February 1975, a southbound train on the Northern City Line failed to stop at its Moorgate terminus and crashed into the wall at the end of the tunnel, in the Moorgate tube crash. There were 43 deaths and 74 injuries, the greatest loss of life during peacetime on the London Underground. In 1976, the Northern City Line was taken over by British Rail and linked up with the main line railway at Finsbury Park, a transfer that had already been planned prior to the accident.\nIn 1979, another new tube, the Jubilee line, named in honour of the Silver Jubilee of Elizabeth II, took over the Stanmore branch from the Bakerloo line, linking it to a newly constructed line between Baker Street and Charing Cross stations. Under the control of the GLC, London Transport introduced a system of fare zones for buses and underground trains that cut the average fare in 1981. Fares increased following a legal challenge but the fare zones were retained, and in the mid-1980s the Travelcard and the Capitalcard were introduced.\nLondon Regional Transport era.\nIn 1984, control of London Buses and the London Underground passed back to central government with the creation of London Regional Transport (LRT), which reported directly to the Secretary of State for Transport, still retaining the London Transport brand. One person operation had been planned in 1968, but conflict with the trade unions delayed introduction until the 1980s.\nOn 18 November 1987, fire broke out in an escalator at King's Cross St Pancras tube station. The resulting fire cost the lives of 31 people and injured a further 100. London Underground was strongly criticised in the aftermath for its attitude to fires underground, and publication of the report into the fire led to the resignation of senior management of both London Underground and London Regional Transport. Following the fire, substantial improvements to safety on the Tube were implemented \u2013 including the banning of smoking, removal of wooden escalators, installation of CCTV and fire detectors, as well as comprehensive radio coverage for the emergency services.\nIn April 1994, the Waterloo &amp; City Railway, by then owned by British Rail and known as the Waterloo &amp; City line, was transferred to the London Underground. In 1999, the Jubilee Line Extension project extended the Jubilee line from Green Park station through the growing Docklands to Stratford station. This resulted in the closure of the short section of tunnel between Green Park and Charing Cross stations. The 11 new stations were designed to be \"future-proof\", with wide passageways, large quantities of escalators and lifts, and emergency exits. The stations were the first on the Underground to have platform edge doors, and were built to have step-free access throughout. The stations have subsequently been praised as exemplary pieces of 20th-century architecture.\nTransport for London era.\nIn 2000, Transport for London (TfL) was created as an integrated body responsible for London's transport system. Part of the Greater London Authority, the TfL Board is appointed by the Mayor of London, who also sets the structure and level of public transport fares in London. The day-to-day running of the corporation is left to the Commissioner of Transport for London.\nTfL eventually replaced London Regional Transport, and discontinued the use of the London Transport brand in favour of its own brand. The transfer of responsibility was staged, with transfer of control of London Underground delayed until July 2003, when London Underground Limited became an indirect subsidiary of TfL.\nIn the early 2000s, London Underground was reorganised in a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) as part of a project to upgrade and modernise the system. Private infrastructure companies (infracos) would upgrade and maintain the railway, and London Underground would run the train service. One infraco \u2013 Metronet \u2013 went into administration in 2007, and TfL took over the other \u2013 Tube Lines \u2013 in 2010. Despite this, substantial investment to upgrade and modernise the Tube has taken place - with new trains (such as London Underground S7 and S8 Stock), new signalling, upgraded stations (such as King's Cross St Pancras) and improved accessibility (such as at Green Park). Small changes to the Tube network occurred in the 2000s, with extensions to Heathrow Terminal 5, new station at Wood Lane and the Circle line changed from serving a closed loop around the centre of London to a spiral also serving Hammersmith in 2009.\nIn July 2005, four coordinated terrorist attacks took place, three of them occurring on the Tube network. It was the UK's deadliest terrorist incident since 1988.\nElectronic ticketing in the form of the contactless Oyster card was first introduced in 2003, with payment using contactless banks cards introduced in September 2014. In 2019[ [update]], over 12 million Oyster cards and 35 million contactless cards were used, generating around \u00a35 billion in ticketing revenue.\nDuring the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games, the Underground saw record passenger numbers, with over 4.3million people using the Tube on some days. This record was subsequently beaten in later years, with 4.82million passengers in December 2015. In 2013, the Underground celebrated its 150th anniversary, with celebratory events such as steam trains and installation of a unique Labyrinth artwork at each station.\nUnder TfL, London's public transport network became more unified, with existing suburban rail lines across London upgraded and rebranded as London Overground from 2007, with the former East London line becoming part of the Overground network in 2010. Many Overground stations interchange with Underground ones, and Overground lines were added onto the Tube map.\nIn the 2010s, the \u00a318.8billion Crossrail project built a new east\u2013west railway tunnel under central London. The project involved rebuilding and expanding several central Underground stations including Tottenham Court Road and Whitechapel. By increasing rail capacity, the line aims to reduce overcrowding on the Tube and cut cross-London journey times. The railway opened as the Elizabeth line in May 2022. Although not part of the Underground, the line connects with several Underground stations.\nIn 2020, passenger numbers fell significantly during the COVID-19 pandemic and 40 stations were temporarily closed. The Northern Line Extension opened in September 2021, extending the Northern line from Kennington to Battersea Power Station via Nine Elms. The extension was privately funded, with contributions from developments across the Battersea Power Station, Vauxhall and Nine Elms areas.\nInfrastructure.\nRailway.\nAs of 2021, the Underground serves 272 stations. Sixteen stations (eight on each of the Metropolitan and Central lines) are outside the London region, with five of those beyond the M25 London Orbital motorway (Amersham, Chalfont &amp; Latimer, Chesham, and Chorleywood on the Metropolitan line and Epping on the Central).\nOf the thirty-two London boroughs, six (Bexley, Bromley, Croydon, Kingston, Lewisham and Sutton) are not served by the Underground network, while Hackney has Old Street (on the Northern line Bank branch) and Manor House (on the Piccadilly line) just inside its boundaries. Lewisham was served by the East London line (with stations at New Cross and New Cross Gate) until 2010 when the line and the stations were transferred to the London Overground network.\nLondon Underground's eleven lines total in length, making it the thirteenth longest metro system in the world. These are made up of the sub-surface network and the deep-tube lines.\nThe Circle, District, Hammersmith &amp; City, and Metropolitan lines form the sub-surface network, with cut-and-cover railway tunnels just below the surface and of a similar size to those on British main lines. These converge on a bi-directional loop in central London, sharing tracks and stations with each other at various places along their respective routes.\nThe Bakerloo, Central, Jubilee, Northern, Piccadilly, Victoria and Waterloo &amp; City lines are deep-level tubes, with smaller trains that run in circular tunnels (\"tubes\") with a diameter of about , with one tube for each direction. The seven deep-level lines have the exclusive use of tracks and stations along their routes with the exceptions of the Piccadilly line, which shares track with the District line, between Acton Town and Hanger Lane Junction, and with the Metropolitan line, between Rayners Lane and Uxbridge; and the Bakerloo line, which shares track with London Overground's Watford DC Line for its above-ground section north of Queen's Park.\nFifty-five per cent of the system runs on the surface. There are of sub-surface tunnels and of tube tunnels. Many of the central London Underground stations on deep-level tube routes are higher than the running lines to assist deceleration when arriving and acceleration when departing. Trains generally run on the left-hand track. In some places, the tunnels are above each other (for example, the Central line east of St Paul's station); or trains run on the right (for example on the Victoria line between Warren Street and King's Cross St. Pancras, to allow cross-platform interchange with the Northern line at Euston).\nThe lines are electrified with a fourth rail DC system: a conductor rail between the rails is energised at and a rail outside the running rails at , giving a potential difference of . On the sections of line shared with mainline trains, such as the District line from East Putney to Wimbledon and Gunnersbury to Richmond, and the Bakerloo line north of Queen's Park, the centre rail is bonded to the running rails.\nThe average speed on the Underground is . Outside the tunnels of central London, many lines' trains tend to travel at over in the suburban and countryside areas. The Metropolitan line can reach speeds of .\nLines.\nThe London Underground was used for 1.181billion journeys in the year 2023\u20132024.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt; London Underground patronage by line in 2020\u201321\nServices using former and current main lines.\nThe Underground uses several railways and alignments that were built by main-line railway companies.\nBetween Queen's Park and Harrow &amp; Wealdstone this runs over the Watford DC Line also used by London Overground, alongside the London &amp; North Western Railway (LNWR) main line that opened in 1837. The route was laid out by the LNWR in 1912\u201315 and is part of the Network Rail system.\nThe railway from just south of Leyton to just south of Loughton was built by Eastern Counties Railway in 1856 on the same alignment in use today. The Underground also uses the line built in 1865 by the Great Eastern Railway (GER) between Loughton to Ongar via Epping. The connection to the main line south of Leyton was closed in 1970 and removed in 1972. The line from Epping to Ongar was closed in 1994; most of the line is in use today by the heritage Epping Ongar Railway. The line between Newbury Park and Woodford junction (west of Roding Valley) via Hainault was built by the GER in 1903, the connections to the main line south of Newbury Park closing in 1947 (in the Ilford direction) and 1956 (in the Seven Kings direction).\nThe line from just north of White City to Ealing Broadway was built in 1917 by the Great Western Railway (GWR) and passenger service introduced by the Underground in 1920. North Acton to West Ruislip was built by GWR on behalf of the Underground in 1947\u20138 alongside the pre-existing tracks from Old Oak Common junction towards High Wycombe and beyond, which date from 1904. As of \u00a02013[ [update]], the original Old Oak Common junction to South Ruislip route has one main-line train a day to and from Paddington.\nSouth of Kensington (Olympia) short sections of the 1862 West London Railway (WLR) and its 1863 West London Extension Railway (WLER) were used when District extended from Earl's Court in 1872. The District had its own bay platform at Olympia built in 1958 along with track on the bed of the 1862\u20133 WLR/WLER northbound. The southbound WLR/WLER became the new northbound main line at that time, and a new southbound main-line track was built through the site of former goods yard. The 1872 junction closed in 1958, and a further connection to the WLR just south of Olympia closed in 1992. The branch is now segregated.\nThe line between Campbell Road junction (now closed), near Bromley-by-Bow, and Barking was built by the London, Tilbury &amp; Southend Railway (LTSR) in 1858. The slow tracks were built 1903\u201305, when District services were extended from Bow Road (though there were no District services east of East Ham from 1905 to 1932). The slow tracks were shared with LTSR stopping and goods trains until segregated by 1962, when main-line trains stopped serving intermediate stations.\nThe railway from Barking to Upminster was built by LTSR in 1885 and the District extended over the route in 1902. District withdrew between 1905 and 1932, when the route was quadrupled. Main-line trains ceased serving intermediate stations in 1962, and the District line today only uses the 1932 slow tracks.\nThe westbound track between east of Ravenscourt Park and Turnham Green and Turnham Green to Richmond (also used by London Overground) follows the alignment of a railway built by the London &amp; South Western Railway (LSWR) in 1869. The eastbound track between Turnham Green and east of Ravenscourt Park follows the alignment built in 1911; this was closed 1916 but was re-used when the Piccadilly line was extended in 1932. The section between Turnham Green and Richmond still belongs to Network Rail now.\nThe line between East Putney and Wimbledon was built by the LSWR in 1889. The last scheduled main-line service ran in 1941 but it still sees a few through Waterloo passenger services at the start and end of the daily timetable. The route is also used for scheduled ECS movements to/from Wimbledon Park depot and for Waterloo services diverted during disruptions and track closures elsewhere. This section is now owned by London Underground but the signalling is still operated by Network Rail.\nBetween Paddington and Westbourne Park Underground station, the line runs alongside the main line. The Great Western main line opened in 1838, serving a temporary terminus the other side of Bishop's Road. When the current Paddington station opened in 1854, the line passed to the south of the old station. On opening in 1864, the Hammersmith &amp; City Railway (then part of the Metropolitan Railway) ran via the main line to a junction at Westbourne Park, until 1867 when two tracks opened to the south of the main line, with a crossing near Westbourne Bridge, Paddington. The current two tracks to the north of the main line and the subway east of Westbourne Park opened in 1878. The Hammersmith &amp; City route is now completely segregated from the main line.\nThe rail route between Canning Town and Stratford was built by the GER in 1846, with passenger services starting in 1847. The original alignment was quadrupled \"in stages between 1860 and 1892\" for freight services before the extra (western) tracks were lifted as traffic declined during the 20th century, and were re-laid for Jubilee line services that started in 1999. The current Docklands Light Railway (ex-North London line) uses the original eastern alignment and the Jubilee uses the western alignment.\nThe line from East Finchley to Mill Hill East was opened in 1867, and from Finchley Central to High Barnet in 1872, both by the Great Northern Railway.\nThe westbound track between east of Ravenscourt Park and Turnham Green was built by LSWR in 1869, and originally used for eastbound main-line and District services. The eastbound track was built in 1911; it closed in 1916 but was re-used when the Piccadilly line was extended in 1932.\nMain line services using LU tracks.\nChiltern Railways shares track with the Metropolitan Line between Harrow-on-the-Hill and Amersham. Three South Western Railway passenger trains a day use District Line tracks between Wimbledon and East Putney.\nTrains.\nLondon Underground trains come in two sizes, larger sub-surface trains and smaller deep-tube trains. Since the early 1960s all passenger trains have been electric multiple units with sliding doors and a train last ran with a guard in 2000. All lines use fixed-length trains with between six and eight cars, except for the Waterloo &amp; City line that uses four cars. New trains are designed for maximum number of standing passengers and for speed of access to the cars and have regenerative braking and public address systems. Since 1999 all new stock has had to comply with accessibility regulations that require such things as access and room for wheelchairs, and the size and location of door controls. All underground trains are required to comply with The Rail Vehicle Accessibility (Non Interoperable Rail System) Regulations 2010 (RVAR 2010) by 2020.\nStock on sub-surface lines is identified by a letter (such as S Stock, used on the Metropolitan line), while tube stock is identified by the year of intended introduction (for example, 1996 Stock, used on the Jubilee line).\nDepots.\nThe Underground is served by the following depots:\nDisused and abandoned stations.\nIn the years since the first parts of the London Underground opened, many stations and routes have been closed. Some stations were closed because of low passenger numbers rendering them uneconomical; some became redundant after lines were re-routed or replacements were constructed; and others are no longer served by the Underground but remain open to National Rail main line services. In some cases, such as Aldwych and Ongar, the buildings remain and are used for other purposes. In others, such as British Museum, all evidence of the station has been lost through demolition.\nLondon Transport Museum runs guided tours of several disused stations including Down Street and Aldwych through its \"Hidden London\" programme. The tours look at the history of the network and feature historical details drawn from the museum's own archives and collections.\nProposed line extensions.\nBakerloo line extension to Lewisham.\nA southern extension of the Bakerloo line from Elephant &amp; Castle has been proposed multiple times since the line opened. In the 2010s, consultation events and preliminary design work took place on an extension. A route from Elephant &amp; Castle to Lewisham via Old Kent Road and New Cross Gate was chosen by Transport for London in 2019. The line could be extended further on the Hayes National Rail line in future. Estimated to cost between \u00a34.7billion to \u00a37.9billion (in 2017 prices), the extension would take around 7 years to construct. Due to financial impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, work to implement the extension is currently on hold.\nOther proposed extensions and lines.\nSeveral other extensions have been proposed in recent years, including a further extension of the Northern line to Clapham Junction. The long proposed Croxley Rail Link (an extension of the Metropolitan line) was cancelled in 2018 due to higher than expected costs and lack of funding.\nIn 2019, the Canary Wharf Group suggested the construction of a new rail line between Euston and Canary Wharf, to improve connections to the future High Speed 2 railway.\nIn 2021, Harlow District Council proposed extending the Central line from its eastern terminus in Epping to Harlow. They argued this would reduce travel times to Epping and London, and help with efforts to add 19,000 new homes to the town and expand the population to 130,000. However, no funding has been allocated for this proposed extension.\nLine improvements.\nBakerloo line.\nThe thirty-six 1972-stock trains on the Bakerloo line have already exceeded their original design life of 40 years. London Underground is therefore extending their operational life by making major repairs to many of the trains to maintain reliability. The Bakerloo line will receive new trains as part of the New Tube for London project. This will replace the existing fleet with new air-cooled articulated trains and a new signalling system to allow Automatic Train Operation. The line is predicted to run a maximum of 27 trains per hour, a 25% increase on the current 21 trains per hour during peak periods.\nCentral line.\nThe Central line was the first line to be modernised in the 1990s, with 85 new 1992-stock trains and a new automatic signalling system installed to allow Automatic Train Operation. The line runs 34 trains per hour for half an hour in the morning peak but is unable to operate more frequently because of a lack of additional trains. The 85 existing 1992-stock trains are the most unreliable on the London Underground as they are equipped with the first generation of solid-state direct-current thyristor-control traction equipment. The trains often break down, have to be withdrawn from service at short notice and at times are not available when required, leading to gaps in service at peak times. Although relatively modern and well within their design life, the trains need work in the medium term to ensure the continued reliability of the traction control equipment and maintain fleet serviceability until renewal, which is expected between 2028 and 2032. Major work is to be undertaken on the fleet to ensure their continued reliability with brakes, traction control systems, doors, automatic control systems being repaired or replaced, among other components. The Central line will be part of the New Tube for London Project. This will replace the existing fleet with new air-cooled walkthrough trains and a new automatic signalling system. The line is predicted to run 36 trains per hour, a 25% increase compared to the present service of 34 trains for the busiest 30 minutes in the morning and evening peaks and 27\u201330 trains per hour during the rest of the peak.\nJubilee line.\nThe signalling system on the Jubilee line has been replaced to increase capacity on the line by 20%\u2014the line now runs 30 trains per hour at peak times, compared to the previous 24 trains per hour. As with the Victoria line, the service frequency is planned to increase to 36 trains per hour. To enable this, ventilation, power supply and control and signalling systems will be adapted and modified to allow the increase in frequency. London Underground also plans to add up to an additional 18 trains to the current fleet of 63 trains of 1996 stock.\nNorthern line.\nThe signalling system on the Northern line has been replaced to increase capacity on the line by 20%, as the line now runs 24 trains per hour at peak times, compared to 20 previously. Capacity can be increased further if the operation of the Charing Cross and Bank branches is separated. To enable this up to 50 additional trains will be built in addition to the current 106 1995 stock. Five trains will be required for the Northern line extension and 45 to increase frequencies on the rest of the line. This, combined with segregation of trains at Camden Town junction, will allow 30\u201336 trains per hour compared to 24 trains per hour currently.\nPiccadilly line.\nThe eighty-six 1973 stock trains that operate on the Piccadilly line are some of the most reliable trains on the London Underground. The trains have exceeded their design life of around 40 years and are in need of replacement. The Piccadilly line will be part of the New Tube for London Project. This will replace the existing fleet with new air-cooled walk-through trains and a new signalling system to allow Automatic Train Operation. The line is predicted to run 30\u201336 trains per hour, up to a 50% increase compared to the 24\u201325 train per hour service provided today. The line will be the first to be upgraded as part of the New Tube for London Project, as passenger numbers have increased over recent years and are expected to increase further. This line is important in this project because it currently provides a less frequent service than other lines.\nVictoria line.\nThe signalling system on the Victoria line has been replaced to increase capacity on the line by around 25%; the line now runs up to 36 trains per hour compared to 27\u201328 previously. The trains have been replaced with 47 new higher-capacity 2009-stock trains. The peak frequency was increased to 36 trains per hour in 2016 after track works were completed to the layout of the points at Walthamstow Central crossover, which transfers northbound trains to the southbound line for their return journey. This resulted in a 40% increase in capacity between Seven Sisters and Walthamstow Central.\nWaterloo &amp; City line.\nThe line was upgraded with five new 1992-stock trains in the early 1990s, at the same time as the Central line was upgraded. The line operates under traditional signalling and does not use Automatic Train Operation. The line will be part of the New Tube for London Project. This will replace the existing fleet with new air-cooled walk-through trains and a new signalling system to allow Automatic Train Operation. The line is predicted to run 30 trains per hour, an increase of up to 50% on the current 21 trains per hour. The line may also be one of the first to be upgraded, alongside the Piccadilly line, with new trains, systems and platform-edge doors to test the systems before the Central and Bakerloo lines are upgraded.\nSub-surface lines (District, Metropolitan, Hammersmith &amp; City and Circle).\nNew S Stock trains have been introduced on the sub-surface (District, Metropolitan, Hammersmith &amp; City and Circle) lines. These were all delivered by 2017. 191 trains have been introduced: 58 for the Metropolitan line and 133 for the Circle, District and Hammersmith &amp; City lines. The track, electrical supply and signalling systems are also being upgraded in a programme to increase peak-hour capacity. The replacement of the signalling system and the introduction of Automatic Train Operation and Control is scheduled for 2019\u201322. A control room for the sub-surface network has been built in Hammersmith and an automatic train control (ATC) system is to replace ageing signalling equipment dating from between the mid-1920s and late 1980s, including the signal cabin at Edgware Road, the control room at Earl's Court, and the signalling centre at Baker Street. Bombardier won the contract in June 2011 but was released by agreement in December 2013, and London Underground has now issued another signalling contract, with Thales.\nNew trains for deep-level lines.\nIn mid-2014, Transport for London issued a tender for up to 18 trains for the Jubilee line and up to 50 trains for the Northern line. These would be used to increase frequencies and cover the Battersea extension on the Northern line.\nIn early 2014, the Bakerloo, Central, Piccadilly and Waterloo &amp; City line rolling-stock replacement project was renamed \"New Tube for London\" (NTfL) and moved from the feasibility stage to the design and specification stage. The study had shown that, with new generation trains and re-signalling:\nThe project is estimated to cost \u00a316.42billion (\u00a39.86billion at 2013 prices). A notice was published on 28 February 2014 in the Official Journal of the European Union asking for expressions of interest in building the trains. On 9 October 2014, TFL published a shortlist of those (Alstom, Siemens, Hitachi, CAF and Bombardier) who had expressed an interest in supplying 250 trains for between \u00a31.0billion and \u00a32.5billion, and on the same day opened an exhibition with a design by PriestmanGoode. The fully automated trains may be able to run without drivers, but the ASLEF and RMT trade unions that represent the drivers strongly oppose this, saying it would affect safety. The invitation to tender for the trains was issued in January 2016; the specifications for the Piccadilly line infrastructure are expected in 2016, and the first train is due to run on the Piccadilly line in 2023. Siemens Mobility's Inspiro design was selected in June 2018 in a \u00a31.5billion contract.\nVentilation and cooling.\nWhen the Bakerloo line opened in 1906, it was advertised with a maximum temperature of , but over time the tube tunnels have warmed up. In 1938 approval was given for a ventilation improvement programme, and a refrigeration unit was installed in a lift shaft at Tottenham Court Road. Temperatures of were reported in the 2006 European heat wave. It was claimed in 2002 that, if animals were being transported, temperatures on the Tube would break European Commission animal welfare laws. A 2000 study reported that air quality was 73 times worse than at street level, with a passenger inhaling the same mass of particulates during a twenty-minute journey on the Northern line as when smoking a cigarette. The main purpose of the London Underground's ventilation fans is to extract hot air from the tunnels, and fans across the network are being refurbished, although complaints of noise from local residents preclude their use at full power at night.\nIn June 2006 a groundwater cooling system was installed at Victoria station. In 2012, air-cooling units were installed on platforms at Green Park station using cool deep groundwater and at Oxford Circus using chiller units at the top of an adjacent building. New air-conditioned trains have been introduced on the sub-surface lines, but were initially ruled out for the tube trains due to space being considered limited on tube trains for air-conditioning units and that these would heat the tunnels even more. The New Tube for London, which will replace the trains for the Bakerloo, Central, Waterloo and City and Piccadilly lines, is planned to have air conditioning for the new trains along with better energy conservation and regenerative braking.\nIn the original Tube design, trains passing through close fitting tunnels act as pistons to create air pressure gradients between stations. This pressure difference drives ventilation between platforms and the surface exits through the passenger foot network. This system depends on adequate cross-sectional area of the airspace above the passengers' heads in the foot tunnels and escalators, where laminar airflow is proportional to the fourth power of the radius, the Hagen\u2013Poiseuille equation. It also depends on an absence of turbulence in the tunnel headspace. In many stations the ventilation system is now ineffective because of alterations that reduce tunnel diameters and increase turbulence. An example is Green Park tube station, where false ceiling panels attached to metal frames have been installed that reduce the above-head airspace diameter by more than half in many parts. This has the effect of reducing laminar airflow by 94%.\nOriginally, air turbulence was kept to a minimum by keeping all signage flat to the tunnel walls. Now, the ventilation space above head height is crowded with ducting, conduits, cameras, speakers and equipment acting as a baffle plates with predictable reductions in flow. Often, electronic signs have their flat surface at right angles to the main air flow, causing choked flow. Temporary sign boards that stand at the top of escalators also maximise turbulence. The alterations to the ventilation system are important, not only to heat exchange.\nAir quality.\nThe Committee on the Medical Effects of Air Pollutants (COMEAP) has reported on the relative risks of breathing air pollution in different situations. In January 2019, for example, it reported that pollution from particulates is up to 30 times higher on the London Underground than on streets in the roads above, with the Northern Line having the worst air quality.\nLifts and escalators.\nOriginally access to the deep-tube platforms was by a lift. Each lift was staffed, and at some quiet stations in the 1920s the ticket office was moved into the lift, or it was arranged that the lift could be controlled from the ticket office. The first escalator on the London Underground was installed in 1911 between the District and Piccadilly platforms at Earl's Court and from the following year new deep-level stations were provided with escalators instead of lifts. The escalators had a diagonal shunt at the top landing. In 1921 a recorded voice instructed passengers to stand on the right and signs followed in the Second World War. Travellers were asked to stand on the right so that anyone wishing to overtake them would have a clear passage on the left side of the escalator. The first 'comb' type escalator was installed in 1924 at Clapham Common. In the 1920s and 1930s many lifts were replaced by escalators. After the fatal 1987 King's Cross fire, all wooden escalators were replaced with metal ones and the mechanisms are regularly degreased to lower the potential for fires. The only wooden escalator not to be replaced was at Greenford station, which remained until March 2014 when TfL replaced it with the first incline lift on the UK transport network in October 2015.\nThere are 426 escalators on the London Underground system and the longest, at , is at Angel. The shortest, at Stratford, gives a vertical rise of . There are 184 lifts, and numbers have increased in recent years because of investment in making tube stations accessible. Over 28 stations will have lifts installed over the next 10 years, bringing the total of step-free stations to over 100. Lift and escalators are abundant with advertising posters which can be used for artistic purposes due to the nature of their layout.\nWi-Fi and mobile phone reception.\nIn mid-2012, London Underground, in partnership with Virgin Media, trialled Wi-Fi hotspots in many stations, but not in the tunnels, that allowed passengers free internet access. The free trial proved successful and was extended to the end of 2012, whereupon it switched to a service freely available to subscribers to Virgin Media and others, or as a paid-for service. It was not previously possible to use mobile phones on most parts of the Underground (excluding services running overground or occasionally sub-surface, depending on the phone and carrier) using native 2G, 3G or 4G networks, and a project to extend coverage before the 2012 Olympics was abandoned because of commercial and technical difficulties.\nIn March 2020, 2G, 3G and 4G signal was made available on parts of the Jubilee line, between Westminster and Canning Town, throughout the stations and tunnels as part of an initial trial.\nIn June 2021, Vodafone dropped London Underground Wi-Fi connectivity across the entire network. This was restored in April 2023 after control of the Wi-Fi connectivity moved from Virgin Media to Boldyn Networks as part of their 20-year concession deal with Transport for London, providing data connectivity across the entire network.\nIn December 2022, additional mobile coverage, including 5G connectivity, launched at a small subset of stations and tunnel segments on the Central line, with a view to expand to the full set of sub-surface stations and tunnels on the London Underground, and also the Elizabeth Line, by the end of 2024. Further stations on the Northern line were launched from January 2023, with additional Northern line stations also being added in June 2023. Not all stations have identical coverage solutions, with some not having 5G connectivity present. As of June 2023, testing has begun on sections of the Bakerloo, Piccadilly and Victoria lines.\nIn November and December 2023, more mobile data coverage was launched on more stations on the Northern and Central Lines. On the Northern line: all stations from Tottenham Court Road to Euston. on the Central line: from Oxford Circus to Chancery Lane.\nTravelling.\nTicketing.\nThe Underground received \u00a32.669 billion in fares in 2016/17 and uses Transport for London's zonal fare system to calculate fares. There are nine zones with zone 1 being the central zone, which includes the loop of the Circle line with a few stations to the south of River Thames. The only London Underground stations in Zones 7 to 9 are on the Metropolitan line beyond Moor Park, outside London region. Some stations are in two zones, and the cheapest fare applies. Paper tickets, the contactless Oyster cards, contactless debit or credit cards and Apple Pay and Android Pay smartphones and watches can be used for travel. Single and return tickets are available in either format, but Travelcards (season tickets) for longer than a day are available only on Oyster cards.\nTfL introduced the Oyster card in 2003; this is a pre-payment smartcard with an embedded contactless RFID chip. It can be loaded with Travelcards and used on the Underground, the Overground, buses, trams, the Docklands Light Railway, and National Rail services within London. Fares for single journeys are cheaper than paper tickets, and a daily cap limits the total cost in a day to the price of a Day Travelcard. The Oyster card must be 'touched in' at the start and end of a journey, otherwise it is regarded as 'incomplete' and the maximum fare is charged. In March 2012 the cost of this in the previous year to travellers was \u00a366.5million.\nIn 2014, TfL became the first public transport provider in the world to accept payment from contactless bank cards. The Underground first started accepting contactless debit and credit cards in September 2014. This was followed by the adoption of Apple Pay in 2015 and Android Pay in 2016, allowing payment using a contactless-enabled phone or smartwatch. Over 500million journeys have taken place using contactless payments, and TfL has become one of Europe's largest contactless merchants, with around 1 in 10 contactless transactions in the UK taking place on the TfL network. This technology, developed in-house by TfL, has been licensed to other major cities like New York City and Boston.\nA concessionary fare scheme is operated by London Councils for residents who are disabled or meet certain age criteria. Residents born before 1951 were eligible after their 60th birthday, whereas those born in 1955 will need to wait until they are 66. Called a \"Freedom Pass\", it allows free travel on TfL-operated routes at all times and is valid on some National Rail services within London at weekends and after 09:30 on Monday to Friday. Since 2010, the Freedom Pass has included an embedded holder's photograph; it lasts five years between renewals.\nIn addition to automatic and staffed faregates at stations, the Underground also operates on a proof-of-payment system. The system is patrolled by both uniformed and plain-clothes fare inspectors with hand-held Oyster card readers. Passengers travelling without a valid ticket must pay a penalty fare of \u00a380 (\u00a340 if paid within 21days) and can be prosecuted for fare evasion under the Regulation of Railways Act 1889 and Transport for London Byelaws.\nHours of operation.\nAll of the tube closes overnight during the week, but since 2016, parts or all of the Central, Jubilee, Northern, Piccadilly, and Victoria lines, as well as a short section of the London Overground's Windsrush line have operated all night on Friday and Saturday nights. The first trains run from about 05:00 and the last trains until just after 01:00, with later starting times on Sunday mornings. The nightly closures are used for maintenance, but some lines stay open on New Year's Eve and run for longer hours during major public events such as the 2012 London Olympics. Some lines are occasionally closed for scheduled engineering work at weekends.\nThe Underground runs a limited service on Christmas Eve with some lines closing early, and does not operate on Christmas Day. Since 2010 a dispute between London Underground and trade unions over holiday pay has resulted in a limited service on Boxing Day.\nNight Tube.\nOn 19 August 2016, London Underground launched a 24-hour service on the Victoria and Central lines with plans in place to extend this to the Piccadilly, Northern and Jubilee lines starting on Friday morning and continuing right through until Sunday evening. The Night Tube proposal was originally scheduled to start on 12 September 2015, following completion of upgrades, but in August 2015 it was announced that the start date for the Night Tube had been pushed back because of ongoing talks about contract terms between trade unions and London Underground. On 23 May 2016 it was announced that the night service would launch on 19 August 2016 for the Central and Victoria lines. The service operates on the following lines:\nThe Jubilee, Piccadilly and Victoria lines, and the Central line between White City and Leytonstone, operate at 10-minute intervals. The Central line operates at 20-minute intervals between Leytonstone and Hainault, between Leytonstone and Loughton, and between White City and Ealing Broadway. The Northern line operates at roughly 8-minute intervals between Morden and Camden Town via Charing Cross, and at 15-minute intervals between Camden Town and Edgware and between Camden Town and High Barnet.\nNight Tube services were suspended in March 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic. They were reinstated partially in November 2021 and fully in July 2022.\nAccessibility.\nAccessibility for people with limited mobility was not considered when most of the system was built, and before 1993 fire regulations prohibited wheelchairs on the Underground. The stations on the Jubilee Line Extension, opened in 1999, were the first stations on the system designed with accessibility in mind, but retrofitting accessibility features to the older stations is a major investment that is planned to take over twenty years. A 2010 London Assembly report concluded that over 10% of people in London had reduced mobility and, with an ageing population, numbers will increase in the future.\nThe standard issue tube map indicates stations that are step-free from street to platforms. There can also be a step from platform to train as large as and a gap between the train and curved platforms, and these distances are marked on the map. Access from platform to train at some stations can be assisted using a boarding ramp operated by staff, and a section has been raised on some platforms to reduce the step.\nAs of April\u00a02025[ [update]], 93 London Underground stations (34%) are accessible from street to platform level. and there are plans to provide step-free access at another 11 stations by 2024. By 2016 a third of stations had platform humps that reduce the step from platform to train. New trains, such as those being introduced on the sub-surface network, have access and room for wheelchairs, improved audio and visual information systems and accessible door controls.\nDelays and overcrowding.\nDuring peak hours, stations can get so crowded that they need to be closed. Passengers may not get on the first train and the majority of passengers do not find a seat on their trains, some trains having more than four passengers every square metre. When asked, passengers report overcrowding as the aspect of the network that they are least satisfied with, and overcrowding has been linked to poor productivity and potential poor heart health. Capacity increases have been overtaken by increased demand, and peak overcrowding has increased by 16 per cent since 2004\u201305.\nCompared with 2003\u201304, the reliability of the network had increased in 2010\u201311, with lost customer hours reduced from 54million to 40million. Passengers are entitled to a refund if their journey is delayed by 15minutes or more due to circumstances within the control of TfL, and in 2010, 330,000 passengers out of a potential 11million Tube passengers claimed compensation for delays. Mobile phone apps and services have been developed to help passengers claim their refund more efficiently.\nSafety.\nLondon Underground is authorised to operate trains by the Office of Rail and Road. As at 19 March 2013[ [update]] there had been 310 days since the last major incident, when a passenger had died after falling on the track. As of 2015[ [update]] there had been nine consecutive years in which no employee fatalities had occurred. A special staff training facility was opened in TFL's Ashfield House, West Kensington in 2010 at a cost of \u00a3800,000. Meanwhile, Mayor of London Boris Johnson decided it should be demolished along with the Earls Court Exhibition Centre as part of Europe's biggest regeneration scheme.\nIn November 2011 it was reported that 80 people had died by suicide in the previous year on the London Underground, up from 46 in 2000. Most platforms at deep tube stations have pits, often referred to as 'suicide pits', beneath the track. These were constructed in 1926 to aid drainage of water from the platforms, but also halve the likelihood of a fatality when a passenger falls or jumps in front of a train.\nTube Challenge.\nThe Tube Challenge is the competition for the fastest time to travel to all London Underground stations, tracked by Guinness World Records since 1960. The goal is to visit all the stations on the system, but not necessarily using all the lines; participants may connect between stations on foot, or by using other forms of public transport.\nAs of 2021, the record for fastest completion was held by Steve Wilson (UK) and Andi James (Finland), who completed the challenge in 15 hours, 45 minutes and 38 seconds on 21 May 2015.\nDesign and the arts.\nMap.\nEarly maps of the Metropolitan and District railways were city maps with the lines superimposed, and the District published a pocket map in 1897. A Central London Railway route diagram appears on a 1904 postcard and 1905 poster, similar maps appearing in District Railway cars in 1908. In the same year, following a marketing agreement between the operators, a joint central area map that included all the lines was published. A new map was published in 1921 without any background details, but the central area was squashed, requiring smaller letters and arrows. Although Fred H. Stingemore enlarged the central area of the map, it was Harry Beck who took this further by distorting geography and simplifying the map so that the railways appeared as straight lines with equally spaced stations. He presented his original draft in 1931, and after initial rejection it was first printed in 1933. Today's tube map is an evolution of that original design, and the ideas are used by many metro systems around the world.\nThe current standard Tube map shows the Docklands Light Railway, London Overground, IFS Cloud Cable Car, London Tramlink and the London Underground; a more detailed map covering a larger area, published by National Rail and Transport for London, includes suburban railway services. The tube map came second in a BBC and London Transport Museum poll asking for a favourite UK design icon of the 20th century and the underground's 150th anniversary was celebrated by a Google Doodle on the search engine.\nCommissioned by Art on the Underground, the cover of the pocket map is designed by various British and international artists, one of the largest public art commissions in the UK.\nRoundel.\nWhile the first use of a roundel in a London transport context was the trademark of the London General Omnibus Company registered in 1905, it was first used on the Underground in 1908 when the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) placed a solid red circle behind station nameboards on platforms to highlight the name. The word \"UD\" was placed in a roundel instead of a station name on posters in 1912 by Charles Sharland and Alfred France, as well as on undated and possibly earlier posters from the same period.\nTransport administrator Frank Pick, wanting to establish a strong corporate identity and visual brand for the Underground, thought the solid red disc cumbersome and took a version where the disc became a ring from a 1915 Sharland poster and gave it to Edward Johnston to develop, and registered the symbol as a trademark in 1917. The roundel was first printed on a map cover using the Johnston typeface in June 1919, and printed in colour the following October.\nAfter the UERL was absorbed into the London Passenger Transport Board in 1933, it used forms of the roundel for buses, trams and coaches, as well as the Underground. The words \"London Transport\" were added inside the ring, above and below the bar. The Carr-Edwards report, published in 1938 as possibly the first attempt at a graphics standards manual, introduced stricter guidelines. Between 1948 and 1957 the word \"Underground\" in the bar was replaced by \"London Transport\". As of 2013[ [update]], forms of the roundel, with differing colours for the ring and bar, are used for other TfL services, such as London Buses, Tramlink, London Overground, London River Services and Docklands Light Railway. Crossrail will also be identified with a roundel. The 100th anniversary of the roundel was celebrated in 2008 by TfL commissioning 100 artists to produce works that celebrate the design. Roundels are featured outside many underground stations; they are commonly mounted on a white pole known as a \"Venetian mast\".\nIn 2016, Tate Modern commissioned conceptual artist Michael Craig-Martin to \"reimagine\" the roundel, changing its colours for the first time since the sign was introduced. His design was displayed at Southwark Station in collaboration with Art on the Underground to mark the opening weekend of the new Tate Modern gallery situated near the station.\nArchitecture.\nSeventy of the 272 London Underground stations use buildings that are on the Statutory List of Buildings of Special Architectural or Historic Interest, and five have entrances in listed buildings. The Metropolitan Railway's original seven stations were inspired by Italianate designs, with the platforms lit by daylight from above and by gas lights in large glass globes. Early District Railway stations were similar and on both railways the further from central London the station the simpler the construction. The City &amp; South London Railway opened with red-brick buildings, designed by Thomas Phillips Figgis, topped with a lead-covered dome that contained the lift mechanism and weather vane (still visible at many stations, such as Clapham Common). The Central London Railway appointed Harry Bell Measures as architect, who designed its pinkish-brown steel-framed buildings with larger entrances.\nIn the first decade of the 20th century Leslie Green established a house style for the tube stations built by the UERL, which were clad in ox-blood faience blocks. Green pioneered using building design to guide passengers with direction signs on tiled walls, with the stations given a unique identity with patterns on the platform walls. Many of these tile patterns survive, though a significant number of these are now replicas. Harry W. Ford was responsible for the design of at least 17 UERL and District Railway stations, including Barons Court and Embankment, and claimed to have first thought of enlarging the U and D in the UD wordmark. The Met's architect Charles Walter Clark had used a neo-classical design for rebuilding Baker Street and Paddington Praed Street stations before the First World War and, although the fashion had changed, continued with Farringdon in 1923. The buildings had metal lettering attached to pale walls. Clark would later design \"Chiltern Court\", the large, luxurious block of apartments at Baker Street, that opened in 1929. In the 1920s and 1930s, Charles Holden designed a series of modernist and art-deco stations some of which he described as his 'brick boxes with concrete lids'. Holden's design for the Underground's headquarters building at 55 Broadway included avant-garde sculptures by Jacob Epstein, Eric Gill and Henry Moore.\nWhen the Central line was extended east, the stations were simplified Holden proto-Brutalist designs, and a cavernous concourse built at Gants Hill in honour of early Moscow Metro stations. Few new stations were built in the 50 years after 1948, but Misha Black was appointed design consultant for the 1960s Victoria line, contributing to the line's uniform look, with each station having an individual tile motif. Notable stations from this period include Moor Park, the stations of the Piccadilly line extension to Heathrow and Hillingdon.\nIn recent years, the stations of the 1990s Jubilee Line Extension were designed in a high-tech style by architects such as Norman Foster and Michael Hopkins. The project was critically acclaimed, with the Royal Fine Arts Commission describing the project as \"an example of patronage at its best and most enlightened\", and two stations shortlisted for the Stirling Prize. Stations were built to the latest standards, future proofed for growth, with innovations such as Platform screen doors. West Ham station was built as a homage to the red brick tube stations of the 1930s, using brick, concrete and glass.\nMany platforms have unique interior designs to help passenger identification. The tiling at Baker Street incorporates repetitions of Sherlock Holmes's silhouette; at Tottenham Court Road semi-abstract mosaics by Eduardo Paolozzi feature musical instruments, tape machines and butterflies; and at Charing Cross, David Gentleman designed the mural depicting the construction of the Eleanor Cross. Robyn Denny designed the murals on the Northern line platforms at Embankment.\nJohnston typeface.\nThe first posters used various typefaces, as was contemporary practice, and station signs used sans serif block capitals. The Johnston typeface was developed in upper and lower case in 1916, and a complete set of blocks, marked Johnston Sans, was made by the printers the following year. A bold version of the capitals was developed by Johnston in 1929. The Metropolitan Railway changed to a serif letterform for its signs in the 1920s, used on the stations rebuilt by Clark. Johnston was adopted systemwide after the formation of the LPTB in 1933 and the LT wordmark was applied to locomotives and carriages. Johnston was redesigned, becoming New Johnston, for photo-typesetting in the early 1980s when Elichi Kono designed a range that included Light, Medium and Bold, each with its italic version. The typesetters P22 developed today's electronic version, sometimes called TfL Johnston, in 1997.\nPosters and patronage of the arts.\nEarly advertising posters used various typefaces. Graphic posters first appeared in the 1890s, and it became possible to print colour images economically in the early 20th century. The Central London Railway used colour illustrations in their 1905 poster, and from 1908 the Underground Group, under Pick's direction, used images of country scenes, shopping and major events on posters to encourage use of the tube. Pick found he was limited by the commercial artists the printers used, and so commissioned work from artists and designers such as Dora Batty, Edward McKnight Kauffer, the cartoonist George Morrow, Herry (Heather) Perry, Graham Sutherland, Charles Sharland and the sisters Anna and Doris Zinkeisen. According to Ruth Artmonsky, over 150 women artists were commissioned by Pick and latterly Christian Barman to design posters for London Underground, London Transport and London County Council Tramways.\nThe Johnston Sans letter font began appearing on posters from 1917. The Met, strongly independent, used images on timetables and on the cover of its \"Metro-land\" guide that promoted the country it served for the walker, visitor and later the house-hunter. By the time London Transport was formed in 1933 the UERL was considered a patron of the arts and over 1000 works were commissioned in the 1930s, such as the cartoon images of Charles Burton and Kauffer's later abstract cubist and surrealist images. Harold Hutchison became London Transport publicity officer in 1947, after the Second World War and nationalisation, and introduced the \"pair poster\", where an image on a poster was paired with text on another. Numbers of commissions dropped, to eight a year in the 1950s and just four a year in the 1970s, with images from artists such Harry Stevens and Tom Eckersley.\nArt on the Underground was launched in 2000 to revive London Underground as a patron of the arts. Today, commissions range from the pocket Tube map cover, to temporary artworks, to large-scale permanent installations in stations. Major commissions by Art on the Underground in recent years have included \"Labyrinth\" by the Turner Prize\u2013winning artist Mark Wallinger, to mark the 150th anniversary of the Underground; \"Diamonds and Circles\", permanent works \"in situ\" by the French artist Daniel Buren at Tottenham Court Road; and \"Beauty &lt; Immortality\", a memorial to Frank Pick by Langlands &amp; Bell at Piccadilly Circus.\nSimilarly, since 1986, Poems on the Underground has commissioned poetry that is displayed in trains.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Underground (including several fictitious stations) has appeared in many movies and television shows, including \"Skyfall\", \"Death Line\", \"Die Another Day\", \"Sliding Doors\", \"An American Werewolf in London\", \"Creep\", \"Tube Tales, Sherlock\" and \"Neverwhere\". The London Underground Film Office received over 200 requests to film in 2000. The Underground has also featured in music such as the Jam's \"Down in the Tube Station at Midnight\" and in literature such as the graphic novel \"V for Vendetta\". Popular legends about the Underground being haunted persist to this day. In 2016, British composer Daniel Liam Glyn released his concept album Changing Stations based on the 11 main tube lines of the London Underground network.\nIt has also served as the setting of several video games, including 2020 construction and management simulation game ', in which the player manages an underground station, and ', which has a single-player level named \"Mind The Gap\" where most of the level takes place between the dockyards and Westminster while the player and a team of SAS attempt to take down terrorists attempting to escape using the London Underground via a hijacked train. The game also features the multiplayer map \"Underground\", in which players are combating in a fictitious Underground station. The London Underground map serves as a playing field for the conceptual game of Mornington Crescent (which is named after a station on the Northern line) and the board game \"The London Game\".\nIn 1999, Carlton Television premiered a regional game show (Greater London area only) also called \"Mind the Gap\".\nIn 2023, social media influencer Sabrina Bahsoon created the viral '#TubeGirl' trend on TikTok, which involved Bahsoon and other users lip-syncing and dancing whilst on-board trains in the Underground network.\nBusking.\nThe London Underground provides busking permits for up to 39 pitches across 25 central London stations, with over 100,000 hours of live music performed each year. Performers are chosen by audition, with previous buskers including Ed Sheeran, George Michael and Rod Stewart.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17841", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17841", "title": "Large technical system", "text": "System or network of enormous proportions or complexity\nA large technical system (LTS) is a system or network of enormous proportions or complexity. The study of LTSs is a subdiscipline of history of science and technology.\nThe book \"Rescuing Prometheus\" by Thomas P. Hughes documents the development of four such systems, including the Boston central artery tunnel and the Internet."}
{"id": "17842", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17842", "title": "Lulea University of Technology", "text": ""}
{"id": "17843", "revid": "50831093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17843", "title": "Lund University", "text": "Swedish university\nLund University () is a public research university in Sweden and one of Northern Europe's oldest universities. The university is located in the city of Lund in the Swedish province of Scania (Swedish: \"Sk\u00e5ne\"). The university was officially founded in 1666 on the location of the old \"studium generale\" next to Lund Cathedral.\nLund University has nine faculties, with additional campuses in the cities of Malm\u00f6 and Helsingborg, with around 47,000 students in 241 different programmes and 1,450 freestanding courses. The university has 560 partner universities in approximately 70 countries. It belongs to the League of European Research Universities as well as the global Universitas 21 network. Among those associated with the university are five Nobel Prize winners, a Fields Medal winner, prime ministers and business leaders.\nTwo major facilities for materials research have been recent strategic priorities in Lund: MAX IV, a synchrotron radiation laboratory \u2013 inaugurated in June 2016, and European Spallation Source (ESS), a new European facility that will provide up to 100 times brighter neutron beams than existing facilities today, to be operational by the end of 2027.\nThe university centres on the Lundag\u00e5rd park adjacent to the Lund Cathedral, with various departments spread in different locations in town, but mostly concentrated in a belt stretching north from the park connecting to the university hospital area and continuing out to the northeastern periphery of the town, where one finds the large campus of the Faculty of Engineering.\nHistory.\nMedieval origins.\nThe city of Lund has a long history as a centre for learning and was the ecclesiastical centre and seat of the archbishop of Denmark. A cathedral school (the \"Katedralskolan\") for the training of clergy was established in 1085 and is today Scandinavia's oldest school.\nIn 1425, a Franciscan \"studium generale\" (a medieval university) was founded in Lund next to the Lund Cathedral (with baccalaureate degree started in 1438), making it the oldest institution of higher education in Scandinavia followed by \"studia generalia\" in Uppsala in 1477 and Copenhagen in 1479. After Sweden won Scania from Denmark in the 1658 Treaty of Roskilde, the university was founded in 1666 on the location of the old \"studium generale\" next to Lund Cathedral. The \"studium generale\" had not survived the Lutheran Reformation of 1536, which is why the university is considered a separate institution when founded in 1666.\n17th\u201319th centuries.\nAfter the Treaty of Roskilde in 1658, the Scanian lands came under the possession of the Swedish Crown, which founded the university in 1666 as a means of making Scania Swedish by educating teachers in Swedish and culturally integrate the Scania region with Sweden. The university was named \"Academia Carolina\" after Charles X Gustav of Sweden until the late 19th century when Lund University became the widespread denomination. It was the fifth university under the Swedish king, after Uppsala University (1477), the University of Tartu (1632, now in Estonia), the Academy of \u00c5bo (1640, now in Finland), and the University of Greifswald (founded 1456; Swedish 1648\u20131815, now in Germany).\nThe university was at its founding granted four faculties: Law, Theological, Medicine and Philosophy. They were the cornerstones, and for more than 200 years this system was in effect. Towards the end of the 17th century, the number of students hovered around 100. Some notable professors in the early days were Samuel Pufendorf, a juridical historian; and Canutus Hahn and Kristian Papke in philosophy.\nThe Scanian War in 1676 led to a shut-down, which lasted until 1682. The university was re-opened largely due to regional patriots, but the university was not to enjoy a high status until well into the 19th century. Lecturing rooms were few, and lectures were held in the Lund Cathedral and its adjacent chapel. The professors were underpaid.\nIn 1716, Charles XII of Sweden entered Lund. He stayed in Lund for two years, in between his warlike expeditions. Lund and the university attracted a temporary attention boost. The most notable lecturer during this time was Andreas Rydelius.\nPeace was finally restored with the death of Charles XII in 1718, and during the first half of the 18th century, the university was granted added funds. The number of students was now around 500. Despite not being on par with Uppsala University, it had built a solid reputation and managed to attract prominent professors.\nAround 1760 the university's reputation dropped as the number of students fell below 200, most of whom hailed from around the province. However, by 1780 its reputation was largely restored and continued to rise through the 1820s. This was largely owing to popular and well-educated lecturers particularly in philology; the prominent professor Esaias Tegn\u00e9r was a particularly notable character with widespread authority. He, in turn, attracted others towards Lund. One of these was the young theological student C. G. Brunius, who studied ancient languages under Tegn\u00e9r and was later to become a professor of Greek. With time he was to devote himself to architecture and he redesigned several of Lund's buildings, as well as churches of the province.\nIn 1829, the murder at Locus Peccatorum occurred in the Locus Peccatorum residence at the university. Jacob Wilhelm Blomdahl, a theology student, beat his fellow student Anders Land\u00e9n to death in the night. Blomdahl was later executed for the murder, and the controversy the murder created around the conditions of student life were a factor in the creation of Akademiska F\u00f6reningen in the 1830s.\nIn 1845 and 1862 Lund co-hosted Nordic student meetings together with the University of Copenhagen.\nA student called Elsa Collin was the first woman in the whole of Sweden to take part in a spex (a student comedy show).\n20th century \u2013 present.\nIn the early 20th century, the university had a student population as small as one thousand, consisting largely of upper-class pupils training to become civil servants, lawyers and doctors. In the coming decades, it started to grow significantly until it became one of the country's largest. In 1964 the social sciences were split from the Faculty of Humanities. Lund Institute of Technology was established in 1961 but was merged with Lund University eight years later.\nIn recent years, Lund University has been very popular among applicants to Swedish higher education institutions, both nationally and internationally. For studies starting in autumn 2012, Lund received 11,160 foreign master's applications from 152 countries, which was roughly one third of all international applications to Swedish universities.\nWomen at the university.\nThe first woman to study in Lund was Hildegard Bj\u00f6rck (spring of 1880) who had previously studied in Uppsala and had been the first Swedish woman ever to get an academic degree. Her tenure in Lund was however very brief and the medical student Hedda Andersson who entered the university later in 1880 (two years before the next woman to do so) is usually mentioned as the first woman at Lund University. Hilma Borelius was the first woman who finished a doctorate in Lund, in 1910. The first woman to be appointed to a professor's chair was the historian Birgitta Od\u00e9n in 1965, though Carin Boalt was made a professor at the Faculty of Engineering, which at the time was a separate institution, in 1964. In 1992 Boel Flodgren, Professor of Business Law, was appointed rector magnificus (or, strictly speaking, \"rectrix magnifica\") of Lund University. As such, she was the first woman to be the head of a European university.\nCampus.\nThe university's facilities are mainly located in the small city of Lund in Scania, about 15\u00a0km away from central Malm\u00f6 and 50\u00a0km from Copenhagen. The large student and staff population makes an impact on the city, effectively making it a university town. Over a hundred university buildings scatter around town, most of them in an area covering more than 1\u00a0km2, stretching towards the north-east from Lundag\u00e5rd park in the very centre of town. Buildings in and around Lundag\u00e5rd include the main building, Kungshuset, the Historical Museum and the Academic Society's headquarters. The main library building is located in a park 400 meters to the north, followed by the large hospital complex.\nLund University has a satellite campus in nearby Malm\u00f6, Sweden's third-largest city. The Faculty of Fine and Performing Arts' three academies: Malm\u00f6 Art Academy, Malm\u00f6 Academy of Music and Malm\u00f6 Theatre Academy, are all located in Malm\u00f6. The city is also the location of Sk\u00e5ne University Hospital, where Lund University performs a considerable amount of research and medical training.\nCampus Helsingborg is, as the name suggests, located in the city of Helsingborg, almost 50\u00a0km from Lund. Opened in 2000, it consists of a building in the city center, right next to the central train station and the harbor. Nearly 3,000 students are based on the campus. The Department of Service Management and the Department of Communication and Media are among those located at the campus in Helsingborg.\nTeaching and training at the School of Aviation (LUSA) take place at an airfield next to the town of Ljungbyhed, about 40\u00a0km away from Lund.\nMuseums.\nThe Biological Museum is a research collection, not having public exhibitions. It possesses between 10 and 13 million specimens of plants and animals. The museum was founded by Kilian Stobaeus, a teacher of Carl Linnaeus, in 1735. It is divided into three sections: the herbarium, the entomological collections and the zoological collections. The collections are particularly rich in specimens from Sweden and the other Nordic countries, and hold approximately 10,000 type specimens The collections were previously known as the Botanical Museum and Museum of Zoology. These were merged into the Biological Museum in 2005. The museum is a part of the Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences. It holds the historically important collections of Johan Wilhelm Zetterstedt, Carl Gustaf Thomson, Carl Adolph Agardh, Anders Jahan Retzius, Erik Acharius, Axel Gustaf Gyllenkrok and Sven Nilsson.\nLibrary.\nLund University library was established in 1668 at the same time as the university and is one of Sweden's oldest and largest libraries. Since 1698 it has received legal deposit copies of everything printed in the country. Today six Swedish libraries receive legal deposit copies, but only Lund and the Royal Library in Stockholm are required to keep everything for posterity. Swedish imprints make up half of the collections, which amount to 170,000 linear meters of shelving (2006). The library serves 620,000 loans per year, the staff is 200 full-time equivalents, and the 33 branch libraries house 2600 reading room desks.\nThe current main building at Helgonabacken, designed by architect Alfred Hellerstr\u00f6m, opened in 1907. It was named Sweden's most beautiful building in 2019. The old library building was \"Liberiet\" close to the city's cathedral. Liberiet was built as a library in the 15th century but now serves as a cafe.\nHospital.\nEducation and research in the health sciences at the university are operated in cooperation with Sk\u00e5ne University Hospital, located in both Lund and Malm\u00f6. Medical education takes place in the Biomedical Centre, next to the hospital in Lund. Nursing and occupational therapy were taught in the Health Sciences Centre nearby, but have since then moved to the newly inaugurated Forum Medicum, which brings all health sciences disciplines under one roof. The university also operates the Clinical Research Centre in Malm\u00f6, featuring many specialized laboratories. There are over 100 faculty.\nAccommodation.\nLU Accommodation offers housing in the cities of Lund, Malm\u00f6 and Helsingborg. There are different room types including dormitory rooms, studio flats and one and two-bedroom apartments.\nOrganisation.\nAdministration.\nThe University Board is the university's highest decision-making body. The Board comprises the Vice-Chancellor, representatives of the teaching staff and students, and representatives of the community and business sector. Chair of the board is Margot Wallstr\u00f6m. Executive power lies with the Vice-Chancellor and the University Management Group, to which most other administrative bodies are subordinate.\nFaculties.\nLund University is divided into nine faculties:\nResearch centres.\nThe university is also organised into more than 20 institutes and research centres, such as:\nAcademics.\nEducation.\nThe university offers around 275 educational programmes and some 1400 courses. Several programmes and courses are offered in English, allowing foreign students to study at the university. The university offers 6 of the 10 most popular master's programs in Sweden (2021), in terms of the numbers of applications. Five of those programs are offered at the School of Economics and Management (LUSEM). The LUSEM Master's in Finance ranks 36th in the world, according to the Financial Times annual global ranking. The Financial Times Master's programmes in Management ranking places Lund 44th in the world.\nResearch.\nLund University is well known as one of Scandinavia's largest research universities. It ranks among top performers in the European Union in terms of papers accepted for publication in scientific journals. It is also Sweden's top receiver of research grants from the EU, and places fifth among european universities in funding from Horizon Europe. The university is active in many internationally important research areas, such as neurology, nanotechnology, climate change and stem cell biology.\nInnovation.\nOne of the most famous innovations based on research from Lund University is diagnostic ultrasound, which is today a routine method of examination in hospitals around the world. Other\nexamples of pioneering innovations are the artificial kidney, which laid the foundations for the multinational company Gambro and which makes life easier for dialysis patients worldwide, and Bluetooth technology, which enables wireless communication over short distances. Here is a sample selection of discoveries from Lund through the ages.\nRankings.\nLund University consistently ranks among the top 100 universities in the world, with several subjects ranked in the top 50 and higher. Lund was ranked 75th in the world in the 2025 QS World University Rankings, making it the top ranked comprehensive university in Sweden. It is the most popular university in Sweden for international applicants and was ranked as the 40th most international university in the world by Times Higher in 2021. Lund ranks 1st in the World in the 2026 QS World University Sustainability Ranking.\nThe QS World University Rankings by Subject for 2021 places Lund in the top 50 in the following subjects: Geography (24th), Development Studies (32nd), Environmental Sciences (44th) and Nursing (47th). QS also has a separate ranking for business Master's (the QS Business Masters Rankings), where Lund University is ranked in the categories 'Marketing' (42nd) and 'Finance' (47th) in 2022. Additionally, the Times Higher subject rankings for 2021 places Lund in 65th place in Law.\nLund University ranks 55th in the RUR World University Rankings. RUR places Lund in the top tier for the following disciplines: Humanities (32nd), Life Sciences (12th), Medical Sciences (35th), Natural Sciences (18th), Social Sciences (89th), and Technical Sciences (38th).\nIn 2018, Lund placed 82nd in the world in the Times Higher Global University Employability Ranking and in 2025, Lund placed 74th in the Times Higher Education (THE) World Reputation Ranking.\nStudent life.\nLund student life is based on three central structures: the student nations, the Academic Society (AF) and the student unions. Until 1 July 2010, students were required to enroll in a student union, nation and AF in order to receive grades at the university, but this is no longer compulsory. Students may still enroll in these organizations if they wish.\nStudent nations.\nThe nations in Lund are a central part of the university's history, initially serving as residential colleges for students, organized by geographic origin. \u00d6stg\u00f6ta Nation, the oldest nation, was established in 1668, two years after the university was founded. While the nations still offer limited housing, today they are best described as student societies.\nToday students may enroll in any nation, although the nations still preserve their geographic names. In most cases, it does not matter what nation one enrolls in, but different nations offer different activities for interested students.\nEach nation has student housing, but the accommodations in no way meet demand, and they are usually appointed according to a queue system. Most nations tend to have at least one pub evening per week, with a following night club. The solemn peak event in the course of an activity year is the organization of student balls once a year. Most well known of the nation balls (as opposed to balls organized by student unions) is the ball hosted by G\u00f6teborgs Nation - called the \"Gustaf II Adolf Ball\" (also known as the \"GA-Ball\"). Most nations also host at least one banquet per week, where a three-course dinner is served. Each nation also has different activities based on students' interests. All activities within the nations are run by volunteer workers.\nThe Academic Society.\nIn 1830, Professor Carl Adolph Agardh formed \"Akademiska F\u00f6reningen\" (The Academic Society), commonly referred to as AF, with the goal of \"developing and cultivating the academic life\" by bringing students and faculty from all departments and student nations together in one organization. Prince Oscar, then Sweden's Chancellor of Education, donated 2000 Kronor to help found the society. In 1848, construction began on \"AF-borgen\" (the AF Fortress), which is located opposite the Main Building in Lundag\u00e5rd. To this day, AF is the center of student life in Lund, featuring many theater companies, mainly spexes and Lund's Student Theater, a prize-winning student radio (Radio AF), and organizing the enormous \"Lundakarnevalen\" (the Lund Carnival) every four years. \"AF Bost\u00e4der\", an independent foundation with close ties to Akademiska F\u00f6reningen, maintains over 5,700 student residences in Lund.\nStudent unions.\nThe student unions represent students in various decision-making boards within the university and counsel students regarding their rights, housing and career options. There are nine student unions, one for each faculty and an additional union for doctoral students. Lund's Doctoral Student Union is further divided into councils, one for each faculty except for the faculties of engineering and fine and performing arts.\nThe unions are incorporated into the Association of Lund University Student Unions (LUS). It has two full-time representatives who go to weekly meetings with the vice-chancellor and other organizational university bodies. The student union association runs services such as a loan institute, a day-care center and a website with housing information. It also publishes the monthly Lundag\u00e5rd magazine.\nNotable people.\nAlumni and faculty of Lund University are associated with, among other things: five Nobel Prizes, a Fields Medal, the creation of the first implantable pacemaker, the development of echocardiography, the spread of modern physiotherapy, the discovery of the role of dopamine as an independent neurotransmitter, the determination of the number of chromosomes of man, the establishment of osseointegration, the development of the Bluetooth technology, and the development of the modern-day medical ventilator.\nThe following is a selected list of some notable people who have been affiliated with Lund University as students or academics.\nHumanities and economics.\nSamuel Pufendorf (1632\u20131694) was a notable jurist and philosopher known for his natural law theories, influencing Adam Smith as well as Thomas Jefferson. Olof von Dalin (1708\u20131763) was an influential Swedish writer and historian of the late enlightenment era. Peter Wieselgren (1800\u20131877) was a Swedish priest, literature critic and prominent leader of the Swedish temperance movement. Knut Wicksell (1851\u20131926) was an influential economist, sometimes considered one of the founders of modern macroeconomics. Oscar Olsson (1877\u20131950) was an important developer of self-education in Sweden and known as the father of study circles. Bertil Ohlin (1899\u20131979) received the Nobel Prize in economic sciences in 1977 for theories concerning international trade and capital, and was the leader of the Liberal's Peoples Party (Folkpartiet) for 23 years. Gunnar Jarring (1907\u20132002) was Sweden's ambassador in UN 1956\u20131958, and Sweden's ambassador in Washington DC 1958\u20131964. Britta Holmstr\u00f6m (1911\u20131992) was the founder of Individuell M\u00e4nniskohj\u00e4lp (IM), a human rights organization with activities in 12 countries. Torsten H\u00e4gerstrand (1916\u20132004) was an internationally renowned geographer, considered the father of 'time geography' and receiver of the Laur\u00e9at Prix International de G\u00e9ographie Vautrin Lud in 1992. Judith Wallerstein (1921\u20132012) was a renowned psychologist and internationally recognized authority on the effects of marriage and divorce on children and their parents. The first person from Iceland to earn a degree in archaeology, \u00d3laf\u00eda Einarsd\u00f3ttir, studied for her MA and PhD at Lund.\nBiology and medicine.\nCarl Linnaeus (1707\u20131778), began his academic career in Lund by studying medicine and botany for a year before moving to Uppsala. He is known as the father of modern taxonomy, and is also considered one of the fathers of modern ecology. Pehr Henrik Ling (1776\u20131839) is considered the prime developer of natural gymnastics, the father of Swedish massage, and one of the most important contributors to the development and spread of modern physical therapy. Carl Adolph Agardh (1787\u20131859) made important contributions to the study of algae and played an important role as a politician in raising educational standards in Sweden. Elias Magnus Fries (1794\u20131878) was a notable botanist who played a prominent role in the creation of the modern taxonomy of mushrooms. Nils Alwall (1904\u20131986) was a pioneer in hemodialysis who constructed the first practical dialysis machine, commercialized by The Gambro Company. Rune Elmqvist (1906\u20131996) was a physician and medical engineer who developed the first implantable pacemaker as well as the first inkjet ECG printer. Lars Leksell (1907\u20131986) was a notable neurosurgeon who was the father of radiosurgery and later the inventor of the Gamma Knife. Inge Edler (1911\u20132001) developed the medical ultrasonography in 1953, commonly known as echocardiography, together with Hellmuth Hertz, and was awarded the Lasker Clinical Medical Research Award in 1977. Sune Bergstr\u00f6m (1916\u20132004) and Bengt Samuelsson (1934\u20132024) were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1982 for \"discoveries concerning prostaglandins and related biologically active substances\". Arvid Carlsson (1923\u20132018) was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2000 for \"discoveries concerning signal transduction in the nervous system\" and is noted for having discovered the role of dopamine as an independent neurotransmitter.\nMathematics, engineering and physical sciences.\nPer Georg Scheutz (1785\u20131873) was a Swedish lawyer, publicist and inventor who created the first working programmable difference engine with a printing unit. Martin Wiberg (1826\u20131905) was a prolific inventor who, among many things, created the first difference engine the size of the sewing machine that could calculate and print logarithmic tables. Johannes Rydberg (1854\u20131919) was a renowned physicist famous for the Rydberg formula and the Rydberg constant. Carl Charlier (1862\u20131934) was an internationally acclaimed astronomer who made important contributions to astronomy as well as statistics and was awarded the James Craig Watson Medal in 1924 and the Bruce Medal in 1933. Manne Siegbahn (1886\u20131978), a student of Rydberg, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics 1924 for his discoveries and research in the field of X-ray spectroscopy. Oskar Klein (1894\u20131977) was an internationally renowned theoretical physicist famous for the Klein-Kaluza theory, the Klein-Gordon equation, and the Klein-Nishina formula. Pehr Edman (1916\u20131977) was a renowned biochemist who developed a method for sequencing proteins, known as the Edman degradation, and has been called the father of modern biochemistry. Hellmuth Hertz (1920\u20131990) developed the echocardiography together with Inge Edler (see above), and was also the first to develop the inkjet technology of printing. Lars H\u00f6rmander (1931\u20132012) is sometimes considered the foremost contributor to the modern theory of linear partial differential equations and received the Fields Medal in 1962 for his early work on equations with constant coefficients. Karl Johan \u00c5str\u00f6m (1934\u2013) is a notable control theorist, who in 1993 was awarded the IEEE Medal of Honor for \"fundamental contributions to theory and applications of adaptive control technology\". Sven Mattisson (1955\u2013) is an electrical engineer who was one of the developers of the Bluetooth technology. In 2023, Anne L'Huillier (1958-), professor since 1997, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for her work in attosecond physics.\nPolitics and law.\nRutger Macklean (1742\u20131816) was a prominent captain, politician and land owner remembered for introducing agricultural reforms leading to more effective large-scale farming in Sweden. Ernst Wigforss (1881\u20131977) was Sweden's finance minister 1925\u20131926 and 1932\u20131949 and has been considered the 'foremost developer of the Swedish Social Democracy'. \u00d6sten Und\u00e9n (1886\u20131974) was an internationally recognized professor of law and Sweden's minister of foreign affairs 1924\u20131926 and 1945\u20131962. Tage Erlander (1901\u20131985) was Sweden's prime minister 1945\u20131969, potentially a record of uninterrupted tenure in parliamentary democracies, and led his party through eleven elections. Ingvar Carlsson (1934\u2013) served as Sweden's prime minister 1986\u20131991 and 1994\u20131996 and as Sweden's deputy prime minister 1982\u20131986. Rupiah Banda (1937\u2013) was the president of Zambia 2008\u20132011 and its vice president 2006\u20132008. Leif Silbersky (1938\u2013) is a notable lawyer and author famous for representing so-called high-profile cases in Sweden. Marianne Lundius (1949\u2013) was between 2010 and 2016 the president of the Supreme court of Sweden, the first female justice in this position. Utoni Nujoma (1952\u2013) was Namibia's minister of foreign affairs 2010\u20132012 and is since 2012 the country's minister of justice.\nLiterature and culture.\nThomas Thorild (1759\u20131808) was a notable Swedish writer, poet, and philosopher who, among many things, was an early proponent of gender equality. Esaias Tegn\u00e9r (1782\u20131846) was an influential writer, poet, bishop and professor of the Greek language, perhaps most famous for his work Frithiofs Saga. Viktor Rydberg (1828\u20131895) was a notable journalist, writer and researcher, most famous for his works Tomten and Singoalla and regarded as one of Sweden's most important authors of the 19th century. Frans G Bengtsson (1894\u20131954) was a Swedish writer and poet famous for his novels The Long Ships (R\u00f6de Orm) which have been translated to at least 23 languages. Fritiof Nilsson Piraten (1895\u20131972) was a Swedish lawyer and popular author, known for his works Bombi Bitt och Jag and Bock i \u00d6rtag\u00e5rd. Hjalmar Gullberg (1898\u20131961) was a notable writer and poet who was also the head of the Swedish Radio Theatre 1936\u20131950. Ivar Harrie (1899\u20131973) was one of the founders of the newspaper , as well as its editor in chief 1944\u20131960. Elisabet Wentz-Janacek (1923 \u2013 2014) was a composer and musicologist who mapped 20,000 different melody variants for Swedish hymns and helped create the Swedish Choral Registrar. Hans Alfredsson (1931\u20132017) was a Swedish comedian, author and actor, sometimes regarded as the foremost representative of the so-called Lundahumorn (the humor from Lund). Agnes von Rosen was a bullfighter and stunt performer who spent most of her later years in Mexico. Axwell (Born as Axel Christofer Hedfors, 1977\u2013) is a world-renowned DJ, perhaps best known as a member of the trio the Swedish House Maffia. Elisabet Wentz-Janacek was a musicologist, organist, and major contributor to the Swedish Choral Registrar.\nBusiness and entrepreneurship.\nHans Rausing (1926\u20132019) was the managing director of Tetra Pak 1954\u20131985, the company's chairman 1985\u20131993, and has been ranked as the third richest man in Sweden. Pehr G. Gyllenhammar (1935\u2013) is a businessman who was the CEO and chairman of Volvo 1971\u20131983 and 1983\u20131993 respectively, the chairman of Procordia 1990\u20131992, Aviva 1998\u20132005, Investment AB Kinnevik 2004\u20132007, and is the current vice chairman of Rothschild Europe. Bertil Hult (1941\u2013) founded EF Education from his dormitory in Lund and was the company's CEO until 2002 and chairman until 2008. Olof Stenhammar (1941\u2013) is a Swedish financier and businessman who founded Optionsm\u00e4klarna, OM, which later changed its name to OMX and today is a part of the NASDAQ OMX Group. Michael Treschow (1943\u2013) is the current chairman of Unilever and was the CEO of Atlas Copco and Elektrolux 1991\u20131998 and 1998\u20132002 respectively, as well as the chairman of Ericsson 2002\u20132011. Stefan Persson (1947\u2013) was the CEO of H&amp;M 1982\u20131997 and has been the company's chairman since 1998 and has been ranked among the top ten richest men in the world. Dan Olofsson (1950\u2013) is a Swedish entrepreneur and philanthropist who founded the company Sigma and the foundation Star for Life and is a large shareholder in the company \u00c5F. Anders Dahlvig (1957\u2013) was the CEO and President of the IKEA group between 1999 and 2009, during which IKEA experienced an average growth of 11 percent, and is the current chairman of the New Wave Group. Charlotta Falvin (1966\u2013) is a Swedish businesswoman who is the chairman of the companies Teknopol, Barista, Multi-Q and Ideon AB and the previous CEO of TAT and Decuma. Ann-Sofie Johansson is the Creative Advisor and former Head of Design for fashion retailer H&amp;M. Cristina Stenbeck (1977\u2013) is a Swedish businesswoman who is the current chairman of Investment AB Kinnevik.\nPartner universities.\nLund University cooperates with universities on all continents, both in areas of research and student exchange.\nPartners include the University of California system, The University of North Carolina, Nanyang Technological University, Heidelberg University, the University of Tokyo and the University of Texas.\nApart from being a member of the LERU and Universitas 21 networks, the university participates in the European Erasmus and Nordplus programs. It also coordinates several intercontinental projects, mostly through the Erasmus Mundus program.\nThe university is an active member of the University of the Arctic. UArctic is an international cooperative network based in the Circumpolar Arctic region, consisting of more than 200 universities, colleges, and other organizations with an interest in promoting education and research in the Arctic region.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^Note a Prepared for both the book and the sword \u2013 to study and to defend the country in times of war. The lion in Lund University's seal holds a book in one hand, and a sword in the other.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17844", "revid": "2015158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17844", "title": "Lord Peter Wimsey", "text": "Fictional character by Dorothy L. Sayers\nLord Peter Death Bredon Wimsey (later 17th Duke of Denver) is the fictional protagonist in a series of detective novels and short stories by Dorothy L. Sayers (and their continuation by Jill Paton Walsh). A dilettante who solves mysteries for his own amusement, Wimsey is an archetype for the British gentleman detective. He is often assisted by his valet and former batman, Mervyn Bunter; by his good friend and later brother-in-law, police detective Charles Parker; and, in a few books, by Harriet Vane, who becomes his wife.\nBiography.\nBackground.\nBorn in 1890 and ageing in real time, Wimsey is described as being of average height, with straw-coloured hair, a beaked nose, and a vaguely foolish face. Reputedly his looks are patterned after those of academic and poet Roy Ridley, whom Sayers briefly met after witnessing him read his Newdigate Prize\u2013winning poem \"Oxford\" at the Encaenia ceremony in July 1913. \nTwice in the novels (in \"Murder Must Advertise\" and \"Busman's Honeymoon\") his looks are compared to those of the actor Ralph Lynn. Wimsey also possesses considerable intelligence and athletic ability, evidenced by his playing cricket for Oxford University while taking a First in history (referred to in \"Gaudy Night\"). He creates a spectacularly successful publicity campaign for Whifflet cigarettes while working for Pym's Publicity Ltd, and at age 40 is able to turn three cartwheels in the office corridor, stopping just short of the boss's open office door (\"Murder Must Advertise\").\nAmong Lord Peter's hobbies, in addition to criminology, is collecting incunabula, books from the earliest days of printing. He is an experienced church bell-ringer. He is an expert on matters of food (and especially wine), male fashion, and classical music. He excels at the piano, including Bach's works for keyboard instruments. Lord Peter likes driving fast and keeps a powerful Daimler (for example, a 1927 Daimler Double-Six sleeve-valve V12 four-seater); he calls these cars \"Mrs Merdle\" after a character in Charles Dickens's \"Little Dorrit\" who \"hated fuss\". In the eleventh novel, \"Busman's Honeymoon\", we are told he has owned nine Daimlers with this name. \nLord Peter Wimsey's ancestry begins with the 12th-century knight Gerald de Wimsey, who went with King Richard the Lionheart on the Third Crusade and took part in the Siege of Acre. This makes the Wimseys an unusually ancient family, since \"Very few English noble families go that far in the first creation; rebellions and monarchic head choppings had seen to that\", as reviewer Janet Hitchman noted in the introduction to \"Striding Folly\". The family coat of arms, first mentioned in \"Gaudy Night\", is \"Sable, 3 mice courant, argent; crest, a domestic cat couched as to spring, proper\". The family motto, displayed under its coat of arms, is \"As my Whimsy takes me.\"\nEarly life and education.\nLord Peter is the second of the three children of Mortimer Wimsey, 15th Duke of Denver, and Honoria Lucasta Delagardie, who lives on throughout the novels as the Dowager Duchess of Denver. She is witty and intelligent, and strongly supports her younger son, whom she plainly prefers over her less intelligent, more conventional older son Gerald, the 16th Duke. Gerald's snobbish wife, Helen, detests Peter. Gerald's son and heir is the devil-may-care Viscount St George. Lady Mary, the younger sister of the 16th Duke, and of Lord Peter, leans strongly to the political left. At one time she planned to elope with a radical left agitator, and though this did not come about she did scandalise Helen by marrying a policeman of working-class origins.\nLord Peter Wimsey is called \"Lord\" as he is the younger son of a duke. This is a courtesy title; he is not a peer and has no right to sit in the House of Lords, nor does the courtesy title pass on to any offspring he may have.\nAs a boy, Peter was, to the great distress of his father, strongly attached to an old, smelly poacher living at the edge of the family estate. In his youth, Peter was influenced by his maternal uncle, Paul Delagardie, who took it upon himself to instruct his nephew in the facts of life \u2013 how to conduct various love affairs and treat his lovers. \nAs a child, Lord Peter had a French governess and so, like his sister, is fluent in French. He was educated at Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford, graduating with a first-class degree in history. He was also an outstanding cricketer, whose performance was still well remembered decades later. Though not taking up an academic career, he was left with an enduring and deep love for Oxford.\nGreat War and aftermath.\nTo his uncle's disappointment, Wimsey fell deeply in love with a young woman named Barbara and became engaged to her. When the First World War broke out, he hastened to join the British Army, releasing Barbara from her engagement in case he was killed or mutilated. The girl later married another, less principled officer.\nWimsey served on the Western Front from 1914 to 1918, reaching the rank of major in the Rifle Brigade. He was appointed an intelligence officer, and on one occasion he infiltrated the staff room of a German officer. Though not explicitly stated, that feat implies that Wimsey spoke a fluent and unaccented German. As noted in \"Have His Carcase\", he communicated at that time with British Intelligence using the Playfair cipher and became proficient in its use.\nFor reasons never clarified, after the end of his spy mission, Wimsey in the later part of the war moved from Intelligence and resumed the role of a regular line officer. He was a conscientious and effective commanding officer, popular with the men under his command\u2014an affection still retained by Wimsey's former soldiers many years after the war, as is evident from a short passage in \"Clouds of Witness\" and an extensive reminiscence in \"Gaudy Night\".\nIn particular, while in the army he met Sergeant Mervyn Bunter, who had previously been in domestic service. In 1918, Wimsey was wounded by artillery fire near Caudry in France. He suffered a breakdown due to shell shock (which we now call post-traumatic stress disorder but which was then often thought, by those without first-hand experience of it, to be a species of malingering, or even cowardice) and was eventually sent home. While sharing this experience, which the Dowager Duchess referred to as \"a jam\", Wimsey and Bunter arranged that if they were both to survive the war, Bunter would become Wimsey's valet. Throughout the books, Bunter takes care to address Wimsey as \"My Lord\". Nevertheless, he is a friend as well as a servant, and Wimsey again and again expresses amazement at Bunter's high efficiency and competence in virtually every sphere of life.\nAfter the war, Wimsey was ill for many months, recovering at the family's ancestral home in Duke's Denver, a fictional setting\u2014as is the Dukedom of Denver\u2014about 15 miles (24\u00a0km) beyond the real Denver in Norfolk, on the A10 near Downham Market. Wimsey was for a time unable to give servants any orders whatsoever, since his wartime experience made him associate the giving of an order with causing the death of the person to whom the order was given. Bunter arrived and, with the approval of the Dowager Duchess, took up his post as valet. Bunter moved Wimsey to a London flat at 110A Piccadilly, W1, while Wimsey recovered. Even much later, however, Wimsey would have relapses\u2014especially when his actions caused a murderer to be hanged. As noted in \"Whose Body?\", on such occasions Bunter would take care of Wimsey and tenderly put him to bed, and they would revert to being \"Major Wimsey\" and \"Sergeant Bunter\".\nIn the reissue of \"The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club\" (1935), the biography of Wimsey is \"brought up to date\" by his uncle, Paul Austin Delagardie, purportedly at the request of Sayers herself, further giving the illusion that he is a real person. At this point, Wimsey is claimed to be 45 years old and \"time he was settled\". The biography takes up the last eight pages of the book and concludes with the statement that Wimsey \"has always had everything except the things he really wanted, and I suppose he is luckier than most.\"\nDetective work.\nWimsey begins his hobby of investigation by recovering \"The Attenbury Emeralds\" in 1921. At the beginning of \"Whose Body?\", there appears the unpleasant Inspector Sugg, who is extremely hostile to Wimsey and tries to exclude him from the investigation (reminiscent of the relations between Sherlock Holmes and Inspector Lestrade). However, Wimsey is able to bypass Sugg through his friendship with Scotland Yard detective Charles Parker, a sergeant in 1921. At the end of \"Whose Body?\", Wimsey generously allows Sugg to take completely undeserved credit for the solution; the grateful Sugg cannot go on with his hostility to Wimsey. In later books, Sugg fades away and Wimsey's relations with the police become dominated by his amicable partnership with Parker, who eventually rises to the rank of Commander (and becomes Wimsey's brother-in-law).\nBunter, a man of many talents himself, not least photography, often proves instrumental in Wimsey's investigations. However, Wimsey is not entirely well. At the end of the investigation in \"Whose Body?\" (1923), Wimsey hallucinates that he is back in the trenches. He soon recovers his senses and goes on a long holiday.\nIn \"Clouds of Witness\" (1926), Wimsey travels to the fictional Riddlesdale in North Yorkshire to assist his elder brother Gerald, who has been accused of murdering Captain Denis Cathcart, their sister's fianc\u00e9. As Gerald is the Duke of Denver, he is tried by the entire House of Lords, as required by the law at that time, to much scandal and the distress of his wife Helen. Their sister, Lady Mary, also falls under suspicion. Lord Peter clears the Duke and Lady Mary, to whom Parker is attracted.\nAs a result of the slaughter of men in the First World War, there was in the UK a considerable imbalance between the sexes. It is not exactly known when Wimsey recruited Miss Climpson to run an undercover employment agency for women, a means to garner information from the otherwise inaccessible world of spinsters and widows, but it is prior to \"Unnatural Death\" (1927), in which Miss Climpson assists Wimsey's investigation of the suspicious death of an elderly cancer patient. Wimsey's highly effective idea is that a male detective going around and asking questions is likely to arouse suspicion, while a middle-aged woman doing it would be dismissed as a gossip and people would speak openly to her.\nAs recounted in the short story \"The Adventurous Exploit of the Cave of Ali Baba\", in December 1927 Wimsey fakes his own death, supposedly while hunting big game in Tanganyika, to penetrate and break up a particularly dangerous and well-organised criminal gang. Only Wimsey's mother and sister and the loyal Bunter know that he remains alive. Emerging victorious after more than a year masquerading as \"the disgruntled sacked servant Rogers\", Wimsey remarks that \"We shall have an awful time with the lawyers, proving that I am me.\" In fact, he returns smoothly to his old life, and the interlude is never referred to in later books.\nDuring the 1920s, Wimsey has affairs with various women, which are the subject of much gossip in Britain and Europe. This part of his life remains hazy: it is hardly ever mentioned in the books set in the same period; most of the scant information on the subject is given in flashbacks from later times, after he meets Harriet Vane and relations with other women become a closed chapter. In \"Busman's Honeymoon\" Wimsey facetiously refers to a gentleman's duty \"to remember whom he had taken to bed\" so as not to embarrass his bedmate by calling her by the wrong name.\nThere are several references to a relationship with a famous Viennese opera singer, and Bunter\u2014who evidently was involved with this, as with other parts of his master's life\u2014recalls Wimsey being very angry with a French mistress who mistreated her own servant.\nThe only one of Wimsey's earlier women to appear in person is the artist Marjorie Phelps, who plays an important role in \"The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club\". She has known Wimsey for years and is attracted to him, though it is not explicitly stated whether they were lovers. Wimsey likes her, respects her, and enjoys her company\u2014but that is not enough. In \"Strong Poison\", she is the first person other than Wimsey himself to realise that he has fallen in love with Harriet.\nReviewer Barbara Stanton noted that \"Dorothy Sayers had created Peter Wimsey as a womanizer - though a rather gentlemanly and sensitive one. It would have been out of character for him to return Marjorie Phelps' love, and inevitable that he would break her heart - as he must have done to many other women before. But Sayers - a woman writer who had herself experienced disappointments and frustrations in relations with men - evidently decided to take revenge on her character and educate him. Sayers took the conscious decision to turn the tables on Wimsey and make him fall deeply in love with a woman who would make him sweat and wait very very long before she finally accepted him\".\nIn \"Strong Poison\" Lord Peter encounters Harriet Vane, a cerebral, Oxford-educated mystery writer, while she is on trial for the murder of her former lover in December 1929. He falls in love with her at first sight. He saves Harriet from the gallows, but she believes that gratitude is not a good foundation for marriage, and politely but firmly declines his frequent proposals. Lord Peter encourages his friend and foil, Chief Inspector Charles Parker, to propose to his sister, Lady Mary Wimsey, despite the great difference in their rank and wealth. They marry and have a son, named Charles Peter (\"Peterkin\"), and a daughter, Mary Lucasta (\"Polly\"). Visiting the Fen country in Easter 1930 (in \"The Nine Tailors\") Wimsey must unravel a 20-year-old case of missing jewels, an unknown corpse, a missing World War I soldier believed alive, a murderous escaped convict believed dead, and a mysterious code concerning church bells.\nWhile on a fishing holiday in Scotland later in 1930, Wimsey takes part in the investigation of the murder of an artist, related in \"Five Red Herrings\". Despite her rejection of his marriage proposals, he continues to court Miss Vane. In \"Have His Carcase\", in 1931, he finds Harriet is not in London, but learns from a reporter that she has discovered a corpse while on a walking holiday on England's south coast. Wimsey is at her hotel the next morning. He not only investigates the death and offers proposals of marriage, but also acts as Harriet's patron and protector from press and police. Despite a prickly relationship, they work together to identify the murderer.\nBack in London in 1932, Wimsey goes undercover as \"Death Bredon\" at an advertising firm, working as a copywriter (\"Murder Must Advertise\"). Bredon is framed for murder, leading Charles Parker to \"arrest\" Bredon for murder in front of numerous witnesses. To distinguish Death Bredon from Lord Peter Wimsey, Parker smuggles Wimsey out of the police station and urges him to get into the papers. Accordingly, Wimsey accompanies \"a Royal personage\" to a public event, leading the press to carry pictures of both \"Bredon\" and Wimsey.\nBy 1935 Lord Peter is in continental Europe, acting as an unofficial attach\u00e9 to the British Foreign Office (at the time of writing, British diplomacy was much concerned with the impending Italian invasion of Ethiopia). Harriet Vane contacts him about a problem she has been asked to investigate in her college at Oxford (\"Gaudy Night\"). At the end of their investigation, Vane finally accepts Wimsey's proposal of marriage.\nThe couple marry on 8 October 1935, at St Cross Church, Oxford, as depicted in the opening collection of letters and diary entries in \"Busman's Honeymoon\". The Wimseys honeymoon at Talboys, a house in east Hertfordshire near Harriet's childhood home, which Peter has bought for her as a wedding present. There they find the body of the previous owner, and spend their honeymoon solving the case, thus having the aphoristic \"Busman's Honeymoon\".\nOver the next five years, according to Sayers' short stories, the Wimseys have three sons: Bredon Delagardie Peter Wimsey (born in October 1936 in the story \"The Haunted Policeman\"); Roger Wimsey (born 1938), and Paul Wimsey (born 1940). However, according to the wartime publications of \"The Wimsey Papers\", published in \"The Spectator\", the second son was called Paul. In \"The Attenbury Emeralds\", Paul is again the second son and Roger is the third son. In the subsequent \"The Late Scholar\", Roger is not mentioned at all. It may be presumed that Paul is named after Lord Peter's maternal uncle Paul Delagardie. \"Roger\" is an ancestral Wimsey name.\nIn Sayers's final Wimsey story, the 1942 short story \"Talboys\", Peter and Harriet are enjoying rural domestic bliss with their three sons when Bredon, their first-born, is accused of the theft of prize peaches from the neighbour's tree. Peter and the accused set off to investigate and, of course, prove Bredon's innocence.\nFictional bibliophilia and bibliography.\nLord Peter has a noted collection of early editions of Dante: it includes, besides the famous Aldine octavo of 1502, the Naples incunabulum of 1477 sine typographo and the Florence incunabulum of 1481 printed by Niccol\u00f2 di Lorenzo, which in \"Whose Body?\" Bunter bought for him at Sir Ralph Brocklebury's auction sale.\nWimsey is described as having authored numerous books, among them the following fictitious works:\nThe stories.\nDorothy Sayers wrote 11 Wimsey novels and a number of short stories featuring Wimsey and his family. Other recurring characters include Inspector Charles Parker, the family solicitor Mr Murbles, barrister Sir Impey Biggs, journalist Salcombe Hardy, and family friend and financial whiz the Honourable Freddy Arbuthnot, who finds himself entangled in the case in the first of the Wimsey books, \"Whose Body?\" (1923).\nSayers wrote no more Wimsey murder mysteries, and only one story involving him, after the outbreak of World War II. In \"The Wimsey Papers\", a series of fictionalised commentaries in the form of mock letters between members of the Wimsey family published in \"The Spectator\", there is a reference to Harriet's difficulty in continuing to write murder mysteries at a time when European dictators were openly committing mass murders with impunity; this seems to have reflected Sayers' own wartime feeling.\n\"The Wimsey Papers\" included a reference to Wimsey and Bunter setting out during the war on a secret mission of espionage in Europe, and provide the ironic epitaph Wimsey writes for himself: \"Here lies an anachronism in the vague expectation of eternity\". The papers also incidentally show that in addition to his thorough knowledge of the classics of English literature, Wimsey is familiar \u2014 though in fundamental disagreement \u2014 with the works of Karl Marx, and well able to debate with Marxists on their home ground.\nThe only occasion when Sayers returned to Wimsey was the 1942 short story \"Talboys\". The story is set in a quiet rural environment, the war at that time devastating Europe received only a single oblique reference, and the case Wimsey undertakes is just to clear his young son of the false accusation of stealing fruit from the neighbour's tree. Though Sayers lived until 1957, she never again took up the Wimsey books after this final effort.\nJill Paton Walsh wrote about Wimsey's career through and beyond the Second World War. In the continuations \"Thrones, Dominations\" (1998), \"A Presumption of Death\" (2002), \"The Attenbury Emeralds\" (2010), and \"The Late Scholar\" (2014), Harriet lives with the children at Talboys, Wimsey and Bunter have returned successfully from their secret mission in 1940, and his nephew Lord St. George is killed while serving as an RAF pilot in the Battle of Britain. Consequently, when Wimsey's brother dies of a heart attack in 1951 during a fire in Bredon Hall, Wimsey becomes \u2014 very reluctantly \u2014 the Duke of Denver. Their Graces are then drawn into a mystery at a fictional Oxford college.\nOrigins.\nIn \"How I Came to Invent the Character of Lord Peter Wimsey,\" Sayers wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Lord Peter's large income... I deliberately gave him... After all it cost me nothing and at the time I was particularly hard up and it gave me pleasure to spend his fortune for him. When I was dissatisfied with my single unfurnished room I took a luxurious flat for him in Piccadilly. When my cheap rug got a hole in it, I ordered him an Aubusson carpet. When I had no money to pay my bus fare I presented him with a Daimler double-six, upholstered in a style of sober magnificence, and when I felt dull I let him drive it. I can heartily recommend this inexpensive way of furnishing to all who are discontented with their incomes. It relieves the mind and does no harm to anybody.\nJanet Hitchman, in the preface to \"Striding Folly\", remarks that \"Wimsey may have been the sad ghost of a wartime lover(...). Oxford, as everywhere in the country, was filled with bereaved women, but it may have been more noticeable in university towns where a whole year's intake could be wiped out in France in less than an hour.\" There is, however, no verifiable evidence of any such World War I lover of Sayers on whom the character of Wimsey might be based.\nAnother theory is that Wimsey was based, at least in part, on Eric Whelpton, who was a close friend of Sayers at Oxford. Ian Carmichael, who played the part of Wimsey in the first BBC television adaptation and studied the character and the books thoroughly, said that the character was Sayers' conception of the 'ideal man', based in part on her earlier romantic misfortunes.\nAnother theory is that Wimsey was based, at least in part, on Philip Trent, created by E. C. Bentley in the novel \"Trent's Last Case\", a book which Sayers greatly admired.\nSocial satire.\nMany episodes in the Wimsey books express a mild satire on the British class system, in particular in depicting the relationship between Wimsey and Bunter. The two of them seem to be the best and closest of friends, yet Sayers states in the narration of \"The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club\" that Charles Parker is \"in some ways [Peter's] only intimate friend.\" \nBunter is invariably punctilious in using \"my lord\" even when they are alone, and \"his lordship\" in company. In a brief passage written from Bunter's point of view in \"Busman's Honeymoon\", Bunter is seen, even in the privacy of his own mind, to think of his employer as \"His Lordship\". However, in the first book, \"Whose Body?\", when Wimsey experiences a severe First World War flashback, Bunter takes care of him and, once Wimsey is asleep, affectionately calls him a \"bloody little fool.\"\nIn \"The Vindictive Story of the Footsteps That Ran\", the staunchly democratic Dr. Hartman invites Bunter to sit down to eat together with himself and Wimsey, at the doctor's modest apartment. Wimsey does not object, but Bunter strongly does: \"If I may state my own preference, sir, it would be to wait upon you and his lordship in the usual manner\". Whereupon Wimsey remarks: \"Bunter likes me to know my place\".\nAt the conclusion of \"Strong Poison\", Inspector Parker asks \"What would one naturally do if one found one's water-bottle empty?\" (a point of crucial importance in solving the book's mystery). Wimsey promptly answers, \"Ring the bell\", whereupon Miss Murchison, the indefatigable investigator employed by Wimsey for much of this book, comments \"Or, if one wasn't accustomed to be waited on, one might use the water from the bedroom jug.\"\nGeorge Orwell was highly critical of this aspect of the Wimsey books: \"...\u00a0Even she [Sayers] is not so far removed from \"Peg's Paper\" as might appear at a casual glance. It is, after all, a very ancient trick to write novels with a lord for a hero. Where Miss Sayers has shown more astuteness than most is in perceiving that you can carry that kind of thing off a great deal better if you pretend to treat it as a joke. By being, on the surface, a little ironical about Lord Peter Wimsey and his noble ancestors, she is enabled to lay on the snobbishness ('his lordship' etc.) much thicker than any overt snob would dare to do\".\nDramatic adaptations.\nFilm.\nIn 1935, the British film \"The Silent Passenger\" was released, in which Lord Peter, played by well-known comic actor Peter Haddon, solved a mystery on the boat train crossing the English Channel. Sayers disliked the film and James Brabazon describes it as an \"oddity, in which Dorothy's contribution was altered out of all recognition.\"\nThe novel \"Busman's Honeymoon\" was originally a stage play by Sayers and her friend Muriel St. Clare Byrne. A 1940 film of \"Busman's Honeymoon\" (US: \"The Haunted Honeymoon\"), stars Robert Montgomery and Constance Cummings as Lord and Lady Peter and Seymour Hicks as Bunter.\nTelevision.\nA BBC television version of the play \"Busman's Honeymoon\" with Harold Warrender as Lord Peter, was transmitted live on the BBC Television Service on 2 October 1947. A second live BBC version was broadcast on 3 October 1957, with Peter Gray as Wimsey.\nSeveral other Lord Peter Wimsey novels were made into television productions by the BBC, in two separate series. Wimsey was played by Ian Carmichael, with Bunter being played by Glyn Houston (with Derek Newark stepping in for \"The Unpleasantness at The Bellona Club\"), in a series of separate serials under the umbrella title \"Lord Peter Wimsey\", that ran between 1972 and 1975, adapting five novels (\"Clouds of Witness\", \"The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club\", \"Five Red Herrings\", \"Murder Must Advertise\" and \"The Nine Tailors\").\nEdward Petherbridge played Lord Peter for BBC Television in 1987, in which three of the four major Wimsey/Vane novels (\"Strong Poison\", \"Have His Carcase\" and \"Gaudy Night\") were dramatised under the umbrella title \"A Dorothy L. Sayers Mystery\". Harriet Vane was played by Harriet Walter and Bunter was played by Richard Morant. The BBC was unable to secure the rights to turn \"Busman's Honeymoon\" into a proposed fourth and last part of the planned 13-episode series, so the series was produced as ten episodes. (Edward Petherbridge later played Wimsey in the UK production of the \"Busman's Honeymoon\" play staged at the Lyric Hammersmith and on tour in 1988, with the role of Harriet being taken by his real-life spouse, Emily Richard.)\nBoth the 1970s productions and the 1987 series are now available on videotape and DVD.\nRadio.\nAdaptations of the Lord Peter Wimsey novels appeared on BBC Radio from the 1930s onwards. An adaptation of the short story \"The Footsteps That Ran\" dramatised by John Cheatle appeared on the BBC Home Service in November 1939 with Cecil Trouncer as Wimsey. Rex Harrison took on the role in an adaptation of \"Absolutely Everywhere\" on the Home Service on 5 March 1940. The short story \"The Man with No Face\" was dramatised by Audrey Lucas for the Home Service \"Saturday-Night Theatre\" play, broadcast on 3 April 1943 with Robert Holmes in the lead role.\nA four-part adaptation of \"The Nine Tailors\" adapted by Giles Cooper and starring Alan Wheatley as Wimsey was broadcast on the BBC Light Programme in August 1954.\nIan Carmichael reprised his television role as Lord Peter in ten radio adaptations for BBC Radio 4 of Sayers's Wimsey novels between 1973 and 1983, all of which have been available on cassette and CD from the BBC Radio Collection. These co-starred Peter Jones as Bunter. In the original series no adaptation was made of the seminal \"Gaudy Night\", perhaps because the leading character in this novel is Harriet and not Peter; this was corrected in 2005 when a version specially recorded for the BBC Radio Collection was released starring Carmichael and Joanna David. The CD also includes a panel discussion on the novel, the major participants in which are P. D. James and Jill Paton Walsh. \"Gaudy Night\" was released as an unabridged audio book read by Ian Carmichael in 1993.\nGary Bond starred as Lord Peter Wimsey and John Cater as Bunter in two single-episode BBC Radio 4 adaptations: \"The Nine Tailors\" on 25 December 1986 and \"Whose Body\" on 26 December 1987. Simon Russell Beale played Wimsey in an adaptation of \"Strong Poison\" dramatised by Michael Bakewell in 1999.\nBibliography.\nNovels.\nWith year of first publication\nUncollected Lord Peter Wimsey stories.\nIn addition there are\nBooks about Lord Peter by other authors.\nLord Peter Wimsey has also been included by the science fiction writer Philip Jos\u00e9 Farmer as a member of the Wold Newton family.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17845", "revid": "738200", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17845", "title": "Letter (message)", "text": "Written message from one to another\nA letter is a written message conveyed from one person (or group of people) to another through a medium. Something epistolary means that it is a form of letter writing. The term usually excludes written material intended to be read in its original form by large numbers of people, such as newspapers and placards, although even these may include material in the form of an \"open letter\". The typical form of a letter for many centuries, and the archetypal concept even today, is a sheet (or several sheets) of paper that is sent to a correspondent through a postal system. A letter can be formal or informal, depending on its audience and purpose. Besides being a means of communication and a store of information, letter writing has played a role in the reproduction of writing as an art throughout history. Letters have been sent since antiquity and are mentioned in the \"Iliad\". Historians Herodotus and Thucydides mention and use letters in their writings.\nHistory of letter writing.\nHistorically, letters have existed from ancient India, ancient Egypt and Sumer, through Rome, Greece and China, up to the present day. During the 17th and 18th centuries, letters were used to self-educate. The main purposes of letters were to send information, news and greetings. For some, letters were a way to practice critical reading, self-expressive writing, polemical writing and also exchange ideas with like-minded others. For some people, letters were seen as a written performance. Letters make up several of the books of the Bible. Archives of correspondence, whether for personal, diplomatic, or business reasons, serve as primary sources for historians. At certain times, the writing of letters was thought to be an art form and a genre of literature, for instance in Byzantine epistolography.\nIn the ancient world letters might be written on various different materials, including metal, lead, wax-coated wooden tablets, pottery fragments, animal skin, and papyrus. From Ovid, we learn that Acontius used an apple for his letter to Cydippe. More recently, letters have mainly been written on paper: handwritten and more recently typed. \nThere is a wealth of letters and instructional materials (for example, manuals, as in the medieval ars dictaminis) on letter writing throughout history. The study of letter writing usually involves both the study of rhetoric and grammar.\nHistorians of the medieval period often study family letter collections, which gather the personal and business correspondence of a group of related people and shed light on their daily life. The Paston Letters (1425 \u2013 1520 CE) are widely studied for insight into life in Britain during the Wars of the Roses. Other major medieval family letter collections include the Stonor Letters (1420 \u2013 1483 CE), Plumpton letters (1416 \u2013 1552 CE), and Cely Letters (1472-1488 CE).\nIn the United States, letters experienced a boost in popularity after the Postal Act of 1845 decreased the price of sending letters and when paper started being made with wood pulp.\nLetters were a chief form of communication, in both personal and business communications, for many centuries before telegraphy, telephony, and Internet communications reduced their primacy. Even in times and places where literacy was lower, illiterate people could pay literate ones to write letters to, and to read letters from, distant correspondents. Even in the era of telegrams and telephones, letters remained quite important until fax and email further eroded their primacy, especially since the turn of the 21st century. As communication technology has developed in recent history, posted letters on paper have become less important as a routine form of communication. For example, the development of the telegraph drastically shortened the time taken to send a communication, by sending it between distant points as an electrical signal. At the telegraph office closest to the destination, the signal was converted back into writing on paper and delivered to the recipient. The next step was the telex which avoided the need for local delivery. Then followed the fax (facsimile) machine: a letter could be transferred from the sender to the receiver through the telephone network as an image. These technologies did not displace physical letters as the primary route for communication; however today, the Internet, by means of email, plays the main role in written communications, together with text messages; however, these email communications are not generally referred to as letters but rather as e-mail (or email) messages, messages or simply emails or e-mails, with the term \"letter\" generally being reserved for communications on paper.\nOn March 6, 2025, PostNord announced that all letter mail deliveries will cease in Denmark by the end of 2025, citing a 90% decline in letter mail since 2000.\nLetters as historical source material.\nDue to the timelessness and universality of letter writing, extant letters from earlier eras constitute an important category of source material in historiography (the methodology of historians).\nLetters were often subject to state censorship and confiscation. Private letters preserved in state archives tell not only what the author intended but also how the letter's purported content was interpreted by state officials. In some cases, the confiscation of letters led to increased censorship, like bans on correspondence and migration.\nImportance of letters in the 18th century.\nDuring the 18th century, called the \"Great Age of Letter Writing\", the epistolary novel became a hugely popular genre and came from the format of letters. The novel also debuted in the 17th century with \"Love-Letters Between a Nobleman and His Sister\". Letter writers used this to communicate and explore their identity and daily life at the time. As a medium of writing that lies ambiguously between the public and private worlds, letters provide an appealing peek into other people's thoughts, feelings, and lives. During this historical period, publishing these \"private\" letters so they could build and preserve literary prominence became common for the first time. Just as social media streams now allow modern celebrities to present versions of their intimate lives for the public to see and read all about, so did early modern and 18th-century figures carefully build themselves in their letters for audiences to be excited to read these works of literature. In the 18th century, readers frequently associated personal letters with the ideals of honesty and truth. Writing in the 18th-century was a rough process that required a lot of materials, many of which were difficult or expensive to get. Researchers interested in the links and connections between migrants, settlers, and refugees have increasingly concentrated on letters and their purposes. Surprisingly, academics only began examining letters as artifacts in the late twentieth century; most studies continue to focus on the national course of epistolary novels.\nLetters also offer information on changing conceptions of privacy, secrecy, and trust during a period of widespread censorship, especially in war. Lastly, study on letter writing and mail services culture exposes the economic and technical roots of letter writing, as well as how links required resources ranging from writing tables and ink to postal employees and ships to carry letters over the world. A lot of letters that were written in this time also showed up in a popular magazine called \"The Gentleman's Magazine\". People were also charged for postage during this time. They either had to pay before or during transit. Writers took great caution in their number of pages so they did not have to pay so much. These writers were considered very clever in their way to avoid the overcharge. Letter writing also became a really important pastime for some. Women were among these people to write letters and express themselves. A lot of female friendships were formed from women being encouraged to write letters. In fact, the most popular character who wrote in this period was named Clarissa Harlowe. This was also a chance for women to express their intelligence. They used letters also to separate themselves from their husbands and have their own voice to enter more into society. Even when the epistolary novel lost its popularity, people did not stop writing letters. It gave everyone a voice when they did not think they had one and it is incredibly important to people to have that, especially the women of this time.\nAlexander Pope was the first English writer to publish from his own letters during his lifetime, putting out a new example for authors and other important people's epistolary works. Pope recognized that writings may reflect both personal religious devotion and cleverness. Pope's works are lacking in formality and informality. He had written his letters all about his life and what he did. Pope also wrote about his friends and the health and work of them. \"All the pleasure of using familiar letters is to give us the assurance of a friend's welfare,\" Pope said. He had also taken to describing himself as \"a mortal enemy and despiser of what they call fine letters.\" There was a letter addressed to Pope's father that ended up being used as writing paper for the \"Iliad\". When Alexander Pope's letters were published, they were widely read by a number of people.\nComparison with electronic mail.\nDespite email's widespread use, letters are still popular, particularly in business and for official communications. At the same time, many \"letters\" are sent in electronic form. The following advantages of paper letters over e-mails and text messages are put forward:\nThe following advantages are put forward for e-mails and text messages over traditional letters:\nDelivery process.\nHere is how a letter gets from the sender to the recipient:\nThis process, depending on how far the sender is from the recipient, can take anywhere from a day to 3\u20134 weeks. International mail is sent via trains and airplanes to other countries.\nIn 2008, Janet Barrett in the UK received an RSVP to a party invitation addressed to 'Percy Bateman', from 'Buffy', allegedly originally posted on 29 November 1919. It had taken 89 years to be delivered by the Royal Mail. However, Royal Mail denied this, saying that it would be impossible for a letter to have remained in their system for so long, as checks are carried out regularly. Instead, the letter dated 1919 may have \"been a collector's item which was being sent in another envelope and somehow came free of the outer packaging\".\nForms of letters.\nThe forms (conformations) of letters have usually followed traditional norms of the times and places where correspondence took place. Aspects such as where to place the elements (salutation, body of letter, valediction/closing, sender's address, recipient's address, date, and so on) were somewhat standardized albeit also usually flexible in practice. The form often varied by kind of letter. For any kind, though, factors of cost\u2014such as that each sheet/leaf of paper cost money to buy and to post, and the fact of who paid for the posting (sender or recipient)\u2014placed constraints on the forms of letters that varied from negligible in some times and places to crucial in others. These factors of cost drove norms on whether to write on both sides of the leaf, whether to cross the leaf with lines written in both directions (horizontally and vertically), whether to allow margins and how big or small to make them, how much to abbreviate to save space, and whether to have a separate envelope and thus how to fold the letter and where on the leaf to put the addresses. \nBusiness encyclopedias and textbooks of the 19th and 20th centuries show that businesspeople of those eras sometimes took the standardization of the forms of business letters to extremes. Typists were required to follow dozens or hundreds of rules about element placement and sizing, some of them with rather arbitrary and even counterproductive (wastefully expensive) strictness. However, the effort to standardize (on where to put the information and how to represent it) did have various valid motivations, as in some respects it presaged the concept of data normalization, helping with the extensive manual indexing, cataloguing, and filing that characterized the clerking duties of the era. \nOver the centuries, a lexicon of abbreviations, metonymic short forms, and conventional valedictions developed for frequent use in letters. For example, \"yours of the 12th inst.\" meant \"your letter of the 12th of this month\"; \"do\" meant \"ditto\"; and forms like \"Yr Obdt Srvt\" for \"Your Obedient Servant\" were common.\nKinds of letters.\nThere are a number of different types of letter:\nSecurity methods.\nCryptography (secret writing) sometimes played a role in letters in centuries past, as correspondents would use previously agreed code to try to shield the plaintext from the comprehension of prying eyes during the letter's transit. This could be done in business letters to lessen spying by competitors on prices and methods and in personal letters to try to evade postal censorship (either of wartime censors or of peacetime authoritarian censors) or the gossip of townsfolk. It could be in either cryptic form (for example, \"AEDFX GHSTR HTFXV\") or in deceptively readable form (for example, \"the dog will run at sunset unless the rains come\"). By the standards of modern digital applied cryptography, the security was often not especially high (that is, the codebreaking was not necessarily difficult), but it was usually high enough to meet the demands of the context (that is, the degree of risk, the likelihood or stakes of any codebreaking efforts, and the state of the codebreaking art in each era). \nVarious forms or precursors of tamper-evident technology were developed over the centuries to enable the sending and receiving of letters whereby it would be evident to the recipient if anyone else had opened the letter before they received it. The principal class of these methods was sealing wax. Another method was to apply a small thin disc of adhesive material known as a wafer. A more elaborate class was letterlocking, including a type called spiral locking, which was especially relevant to government ministers, royal courts, judicial courts, and legislators. \nEnvelopes are available in plain types as well as types with somewhat higher privacy protection in which a pattern of ink is printed on the inner side, making it more difficult for anyone trying to candle a sealed letter (that is, examine it translucently via backlight). Such envelopes are usually called privacy envelopes or security envelopes. Another sense of the term \"security envelope\" refers to security bags. \nDiplomatic mail pouch systems are special, small, closed postal systems run by each country's ministry of foreign affairs or department of state. A general theme of the diplomatic mail pouch is that outsiders never have physical access to it during the entire chain of custody; it never gets sent off out of sight of authorized persons, which would otherwise be the weak link in the chain where intelligence agencies could surreptitiously examine it in non-evident ways. The mail pouch itself in a diplomatic mail pouch system is often a security bag instead of merely any cloth pouch or sack.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17846", "revid": "22388063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17846", "title": "Lesbian", "text": "Homosexual woman or girl\nA lesbian is a homosexual woman or girl.48 The word is also used as an adjective for women in relation to their experiences, regardless of their sexual orientation; or as an adjective to associate nouns with female homosexuality.22\nThe term lesbian is a derivative of the island of Lesbos, the Greek island home to ancient poet Sappho. Relatively little in history was documented to describe women's lives in general or female homosexuality in particular. The earliest mentions of lesbianism date to around the 600s-500s BC, including Sappho's poetry.\nLesbian relationships and attractions, along with gender nonconforming behaviors more often displayed by lesbians, have been treated in different ways throughout different ages and cultures. While there is a longer documented history of lesbian behavior and relationships throughout different cultures, the idea of a 'lesbian' as a category of person distinct from other women emerged in Europe around the turn of the 19th century. Lesbians' current rights vary widely worldwide, ranging from severe abuse and legal persecution to general acceptance and legal protections.\nModern polls often estimate lesbians to be 1-3% of the population (i.e., 2-6% of women). Lesbian social movements often advocate for legal changes (such as anti-discrimination protections, child custody protections, and legal civil unions or marriages), as well as for cultural, familial, and religious acceptance of lesbian orientations and relationships.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"lesbian\" is the demonym of the Greek island of Lesbos, home to the 6th-century\u00a0BCE poet Sappho. Some of Sappho's surviving poetry discusses her love for other women.\nBefore the mid-19th century, the word \"lesbian\" referred to any aspect of Lesbos, including a type of wine. A shift of the word to describe erotic relationships between women had been documented in 1870. In 1875, a critic referred to Baudelaire's poem \"Delphine and Hippolyte\" (a poem about love between two women, and without reference to Lesbos) as \"Lesbian\". In 1890, the term \"lesbian\" was used in the National Medical Dictionary as an adjective to describe tribadism.\nThe terms \"lesbian\", \"invert\" and \"homosexual\" were interchangeable with \"sapphist\" around the turn of the 20th century. The use of \"lesbian\" in medical literature became prominent; by 1925, the word was recorded as a noun to mean the female equivalent of \"sodomite\".\nSexuality and identity.\nBiological factors.\nPrenatal androgen exposure correlates with same-sex sexual behavior in women. Biological characteristics known to be affected by prenatal hormone exposure have been shown to vary by sexual orientation in women. The finding that digit ratios (one characteristic affected by prenatal hormone exposure) differ between lesbian and heterosexual women has been replicated in cross-cultural studies.\nNeuroimaging studies have found differences between heterosexual and homosexual women in neurological structures, including both those known to be affected by prenatal androgen exposure and those not known to be affected by prenatal androgen exposure. A later meta-analysis concluded that the small sample sizes and small number of studies meant that findings were inconclusive as of 2021.\nGenetics also play a role; around 20% of the variance of sexual orientation in women is controlled by genetics.\nLesbian identity formation.\nWhen a woman realizes she is a lesbian, it may cause an \"existential crisis\". When a woman was raised in an environment with negative stereotypes of lesbians, she may need to work through these stereotypes and prejudices to come to terms with her orientation.93\nLesbians in modern times share an identity that parallels those built on ethnicity, including the concept of group heritage and group pride.\nCompared to gay men, lesbians more often developed their sexual self-concepts either alone or in intimate relationships, instead of in communities, and disclosed them less often.153\nSelf-identification and behavior.\nSome women experience a consistently lesbian orientation. Other women experience varying degrees of fluidity in their orientation.\nLesbians who have never been with men may be referred to as \"gold star lesbians.\" Lesbians who had sex with men before coming out may face ridicule from other lesbians or identity challenges with regard to defining what it means to be a lesbian.\nSome researchers observe that behavior and identity sometimes do not match: self-identified straight women may have sex with women, or self-identified lesbians may have sex with men.22\nSeveral studies have found that the sexual behavior and attractions of exclusively-lesbian women are significantly more likely to be aligned with their identity than those of exclusively-heterosexual women. These included studies of reported attraction throughout the fertility cycle, and direct measures of arousal towards different imagery.\nThe importance of sex.\nA 1983 survey asked couples \"About how often during the last year have you and your partner had sex relations?\". The survey found that long-term lesbian couples named lower numbers than long-term heterosexual or homosexual male couples. This conclusion became known as \"lesbian bed death\". Numerous critiques were leveled at the study, including that the language could be misinterpreted to mean \"heterosexual intercourse\", and that the survey sample was limited to a biased sample of self-identified lesbians in 1983.\nResearchers report that lesbian and heterosexual women are just as likely to view achieving orgasm as important, and that the two groups report statistically equivalent rates of overall sexual and romantic satisfaction. The research suggests that lesbian women tend to achieve said satisfaction through higher quality rather than more frequent sex, and that they engage in different romantic and sexual scripts than heterosexual women.\nLesbians in history.\nThere has been extensive debate as to what qualifies a historic relationship as 'lesbian'. In 1989, an academic cohort named the Lesbian History Group wrote: Because of society's reluctance to admit that lesbians exist, a high degree of certainty is expected before historians or biographers are allowed to use the label. Evidence that would suffice in any other situation is inadequate here... A woman who never married, who lived with another woman, whose friends were mostly women, or who moved in known lesbian or mixed gay circles, may well have been a lesbian. ... But this sort of evidence is not 'proof'. What our critics want is incontrovertible evidence of sexual activity between women. This is almost impossible to find.184\nFemale sexuality is often not adequately represented in historical texts and documents. Until very recently, much of what has been documented about women's sexuality has been written by men, in the context of male understanding, and relevant to women's associations to men\u2014as their wives, daughters, or mothers, for example.\nAncient Greece.\nThe lives of ancient Greek women were in general little-documented. In a notable exception, in the 500s BC, Sappho of Lesbos wrote extensive poetry regarding her love for other women, fragments of which survive. A writing from the 600s BC, documenting Greek girls singing to each other, includes flirtatious lyrics.\nSome male-written works reference lesbianism. One example, from the 300s BC, is the tale of the four-legged humans told by Aristophanes in Plato's \"Symposium\". Another example, from the 100s CE, is the Dialogues of the Courtesans, where a female character talks about being seduced by two lesbian characters.\nIn visual culture, historian Nancy Rabinowitz notes that some ancient Greek red vase images portray women in affectionate or erotic scenes.\nAncient Rome.\nIn first century sources, accounts of lesbian characters include the story of Iphis and Ianthe, related in the \"Metamorphoses\";79\u201386 a story, related by the fabulist Phaedrus, about Prometheus exchanging the genitals of different men and women; and a satirical figure of a masculine woman who has sex with women, named Philaenis, related in the epigrams of Martial.98\u201399\nIn the ruins of Pompeii, a Roman town destroyed in 79 CE, archaeologists discovered a love poem graffitied onto a wall. The poem is written with feminine declensions for both speaker and addressee, and identified archivally as Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum 4.5296.\nA love spell from 3rd or 4th century CE Roman Egypt was written to enchant a woman named Gorgonia to fall in love with a woman named Sophia.\nAncient Americas.\nBoth male and female homosexuality were known in Aztec culture. Although both were generally disapproved of, there is no evidence that homosexuality was actively suppressed until after the Spanish Conquest. Female homosexuality is described in the Florentine Codex, a 16th-century study of the Aztec world written by the Spanish Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan. It describes Aztec lesbians as masculine in appearance and behavior and never wishing to be married. The book \"Monarqu\u00eda indiana\" by Fray Juan de Torquemada, published in 1615, briefly mentions the persecution of Aztec lesbians: \"The woman, who with another woman had carnal pleasures, for which they were called \"Patlache\", which means: female incubus, they both died for it.\"\nEarly modern Europe (pre-1400s).\nThe earliest law against female homosexuality appeared in France in 1270.191 In Spain, Italy, and the Holy Roman Empire, sodomy between women was included in acts considered unnatural and punishable by burning to death, although few instances are recorded of this taking place.130 The earliest such execution occurred in Speier, Germany, in 1477.190\nForty days' penance was demanded of nuns who \"rode\" each other or were discovered to have touched each other's breasts. An Italian nun named Sister Benedetta Carlini seduced other nuns when possessed by a Divine spirit named \"Splenditello\"; as punishment, she was placed in solitary confinement for the last 40 years of her life.190\nIn England, female homoeroticism was so common in literature and theater that historians suggest it was fashionable for a period during the Renaissance.1 Englishwoman Mary Frith has been described as lesbian.\nIdeas about women's sexuality were linked to contemporary understanding of female physiology. The vagina was considered an inward version of the penis; in lesbians, nature was thought to be trying to right itself by prolapsing the vagina to form a penis.12 The idea of hermaphroditism became synonymous with lesbianism. A longer, engorged clitoris was thought to be used in lesbian sex. Penetration was the focus of concern in all sexual acts, and a woman who was thought to have uncontrollable desires because of her engorged clitoris was called a \"tribade\" (literally, one who rubs). For a while, masturbation and lesbian sex carried the same meaning.129\nTribades were simultaneously considered members of the lower class trying to ruin virtuous women, and representatives of an aristocracy corrupt with debauchery. Satirical writers began to suggest that political rivals (or more often, their wives) engaged in tribadism in order to harm their reputations. Queen Anne was rumored to have a passionate relationship with her close advisor Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough. When Churchill was ousted as the queen's favorite, she purportedly spread allegations of the queen having affairs with her bedchamberwomen.137 Marie Antoinette was also the subject of such speculation between 1795 and 1796.\nModern Western Civilizations (1500s-present day).\n1500s-1600s.\nHomoerotic elements in early literature were pervasive, specifically the masquerade of one gender for another to seduce an unsuspecting woman. Such plot devices were used in \"Twelfth Night\" (1601), \"The Faerie Queene\" (1590), and \"The Bird in a Cage\" (1633). During the Renaissance, some women put on male personae and went undetected for years or decades. These women have been described as transvestite lesbians. Some historians view cases of cross-dressing women to be manifestations of women seizing social power, or their way of making sense out of their desire for women.\nIn the 1600s, Queen Christina of Sweden had a tendency to dress as a man, abdicated the throne in 1654 to avoid marriage, and was known to pursue romantic relationships with women.\nCatharine Linck and other women who were accused of using dildos, such as two nuns in 16th century Spain executed for using \"material instruments\", were punished more severely than those who did not.191 Linck was executed in Prussia in 1721.\n1700s.\nTwo marriages between women were recorded in Cheshire, England, in 1707 (between Hannah Wright and Anne Gaskill) and 1708 (between Ane Norton and Alice Pickford) with no comment about both parties being female.30136\nIn 1709, English aristocrat Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, wrote to Anne Wortley: \"Nobody was so entirely, so faithfully yours ... I put in your lovers, for I don't allow it possible for a man to be so sincere as I am.\"119\nThe Swiss woman Anne Grandjean, disguised as male, married and relocated with her wife to Lyons, but was exposed by a woman with whom she had had a previous affair and sentenced to time in the stocks and prison.\nIn the 1700s, English poet Anna Seward had a devoted friendship with Honora Sneyd. Sneyd was the subject of many of Seward's poems. When Sneyd married despite Seward's protest, Seward's poems became angry, and she continued to write about Sneyd long after her death.\nAlso in the 1700s, Deborah Sampson fought in the American Revolution under the name Robert Shurtlieff, and pursued relationships with women.\nAlso in the 1700s, English writer and philosopher Mary Wollstonecraft was attached to a woman named Fanny Blood. Writing to another woman, Wollstonecraft declared, \"The roses will bloom when there's peace in the breast, and the prospect of living with my Fanny gladdens my heart:\u2014You know not how I love her.\"139\nHenry Fielding wrote a pamphlet titled \"The Female Husband\" in 1746, based on the life of Mary Hamilton, who was arrested after marrying a woman while masquerading as a man, and was sentenced to public whipping and six months in jail.\nThe Irish Eleanor Butler and Sarah Ponsonby were nicknamed the Ladies of Llangollen. Butler and Ponsonby eloped in 1778, to the relief of Ponsonby's family (concerned about their reputation had she run away with a man)75 to live together in Wales for 51 years and be thought of as eccentrics. Their story was considered \"the epitome of virtuous romantic friendship\" and inspired poetry by Anna Seward and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.\n1800s-early 1900s.\nRe-examining romantic friendships.\nDuring the 17th through 19th centuries in the West, a woman expressing passionate love for another woman was fashionable, accepted, and encouraged.136 These relationships were termed romantic friendships, Boston marriages, or \"sentimental friends\". These relationships were documented by large volumes of letters written between women. Any sexual components of the relationships were not publicly discussed. Romantic friendships were promoted as alternatives to and practice for a woman's marriage to a man.\nIn a rare instance of sexuality being the focus of a romantic friendship, two Scottish schoolteachers in the early 19th century were accused by a student of visiting in the same bed, kissing, and making the bed shake. The student's grandmother reported the teachers to the authorities, who were skeptical that their actions were sexual in nature, or that they extended beyond the bounds of normal friendship: \"Are we to say that every woman who has formed an intimate friendship and has slept in the same bed with another is guilty? Where is the innocent woman in Scotland?\"233\nAround the turn of the 20th century, the development of higher education provided opportunities for women. In all-female surroundings, a culture of romantic pursuit was fostered in women's colleges. Older students mentored younger ones, called on them socially, took them to all-women dances, and sent them flowers, cards, and poems that declared their undying love for each other. These were called \"smashes\" or \"spoons\", and they were written about quite frankly in stories for girls aspiring to attend college in publications such as \"Ladies Home Journal\", a children's magazine titled \"St. Nicholas\", and a collection called \"Smith College Stories\", without negative views.255 Enduring loyalty, devotion, and love were major components to these stories, and sexual acts beyond kissing were consistently undescribed.\nFaderman calls this period \"the last breath of innocence\" before 1920 when characterizations of female affection were connected to sexuality, marking lesbians as a unique and often unflatteringly portrayed group. Specifically, Faderman connects the growth of women's independence and their beginning to reject strictly prescribed roles in the Victorian era to the scientific designation of lesbianism as a type of aberrant sexual behavior.\nNotable relationships.\nIn the 1800s, English Diarist Anne Lister, captivated by Butler and Ponsonby, recorded her affairs with women between 1817 and 1840. Some of it was written in code, detailing her sexual relationships with Marianna Belcombe and Maria Barlow.390\nIn the 1800s, Edward De Lacy Evans was born female in Ireland, but took a male name during the voyage to Australia and lived as a man for 23 years in Victoria, marrying three times.224\nAmerican poet Emily Dickinson (1830-1886) wrote over 300 letters and poems to Susan Gilbert, who later became her sister-in-law, and later engaged in another romantic correspondence with Kate Scott Anthon.\nAmerican freeborn Black women Addie Brown and Rebecca Primus left evidence of their passion in letters: \"No \"kisses\" is like youres\".234 They wrote openly about their sexual affection for one another, and despite their working-class economic status their writings survived, both of which are unusual for the time.\nIn 1870, American Alice Baldy wrote to Josie Varner, \"Do you know that if you touch me, or speak to me there is not a nerve of fibre in my body that does not respond with a thrill of delight?\"232\nIn the early 1900s, the unmarried professor Jeannette Augustus Marks at Mount Holyoke College, lived with the college president, Mary Woolley, for 36 years. Even while unmarried and living with a woman, Marks discouraged young women from \"abnormal\" friendships and insisted happiness could only be attained with a man.239\nIn 1909, Percy Redwood created a scandal in New Zealand when she was found to be Amy Bock, who had married a woman from Port Molyneaux; newspapers argued whether it was a sign of insanity or an inherent character flaw.\nHistory of sexology (late 1800s-early 1900s).\nIn research on \"inversion\", German sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld categorized what was normal sexual behavior for men and women, and therefore categorized to what extent men and women deviated from these \"ideal types\".168 Sexologists Richard von\u00a0Krafft-Ebing from Germany and Britain's Havelock Ellis wrote some of the earliest and more enduring categorizations of female same-sex attraction, approaching it as a form of insanity and debating whether change was possible.241\u2013242\nThe work of Krafft-Ebing and Ellis was widely read and helped to create public consciousness of female homosexuality. In the absence of any other material to describe their emotions, homosexuals accepted the designation of different or perverted, and used their outlaw status to form social circles in Paris and Berlin. \"Lesbian\" began to describe elements of a subculture.\nEarly 1900s.\nFrom the 1890s to the 1930s, American heiress Natalie Clifford Barney held a weekly salon of artistic celebrities in Paris, where lesbian topics were the focus. Combining Greek influences with contemporary French eroticism, she attempted to create an updated and idealized version of Lesbos in her salon.234 Salon attendees included prominent lesbian artists such as novelist Radclyffe Hall,48 artist Romaine Brooks; writer Colette, writer Djuna Barnes, and social host Gertrude Stein.\nBerlin had a vibrant homosexual culture in the 1920s, and about 50 clubs catered to lesbians. Magazines like (\"The Girlfriend\") and \"Gar\u00e7onne\" (aka (\"Woman Love\")) were aimed at lesbians and male transvestites. These publications were controlled by men as owners, publishers, and writers. Around 1926, Selli Engler founded \"Die BIF \u2013 Bl\u00e4tter Idealer Frauenfreundschaften\" (\"The BIF \u2013 Papers on Ideal Women Friendships\"), the first lesbian publication owned, published and written by women. In 1928, the lesbian bar and nightclub guide \"Berlins lesbische Frauen\" (\"The Lesbians of Berlin\") by Ruth Margarite R\u00f6llig further popularized the German capital as a center of lesbian activity. Clubs varied between large tourist attractions to small neighborhood cafes. The cabaret song (\"The Lavender Song\") became an anthem to the lesbians of Berlin. Although it was sometimes tolerated, homosexuality was illegal in Germany and law enforcement used permitted gatherings as an opportunity to register the names of homosexuals for future reference. Magnus Hirschfeld's Scientific-Humanitarian Committee, which promoted tolerance for homosexuals in Germany, welcomed lesbian participation, and a surge of lesbian-themed writing and political activism in the German feminist movement became evident.\nIn 1928, Radclyffe Hall published the novel \"The Well of Loneliness\". The novel's plot centers around Stephen Gordon, an invert woman. The novel was intended to be a call for tolerance for inverts by publicizing their disadvantages and lack of control over the condition.320 The novel's trial for obscenity was described as \"the\" crystallizing moment in the construction of a visible modern English lesbian subculture\" by professor Laura Doan.\nNewspaper stories frankly divulged that the book's content includes \"sexual relations between Lesbian women\", and photographs of Hall often accompanied details about lesbians in most major print outlets within a span of six months. Hall reflected the appearance of a \"mannish\" woman in the 1920s: short cropped hair, tailored suits (often with pants), and monocle that became widely recognized as a \"uniform\".\nIn the United States, the 1920s was a decade of social experimentation, particularly with sex. This was heavily influenced by the writings of Sigmund Freud, who theorized that sexual desire would be sated unconsciously, despite an individual's wish to ignore it. Freud said that while most people have phases of homosexual attraction or experimentation, he attributed exclusive same-sex attraction to stunted development resulting from trauma or parental conflicts.242 Freud's theories were much more pervasive in the U.S. than in Europe. Large cities that provided a nightlife were immensely popular, and women began to seek out sexual adventure. Bisexuality became chic, particularly in America's first gay neighborhoods.\nNo location saw more visitors for its possibilities of homosexual nightlife than Harlem, the predominantly African American section of New York City. White \"slummers\" enjoyed jazz and nightclubs. Blues singers Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, Ethel Waters, and Gladys Bentley openly sang about affairs with women.71 Homosexuals began to draw comparisons between their newly recognized minority status and that of African Americans.68 Among African American residents of Harlem, lesbian relationships were common and tolerated, though not overtly embraced. Some women staged lavish wedding ceremonies, even filing licenses using masculine names with New York City.73 Most homosexual women were married to men and participated in affairs with women regularly.\nAcross town, Greenwich Village also saw a growing homosexual community; both Harlem and Greenwich Village provided furnished rooms for single men and women, which was a major factor in their development as centers for homosexual communities.181 The Village attracted Bohemian intellectuals who rejected Victorian ideals. Homosexuals were predominantly male, although figures such as poet Edna St. Vincent Millay and social host Mabel Dodge were known for their affairs with women and promotion of tolerance of homosexuality. Women in the U.S. who could not visit Harlem or live in Greenwich Village were first able to visit saloons in the 1920s without being considered prostitutes. The existence of a public space for women to socialize in bars that catered to lesbians \"became the single most important public manifestation of the subculture for many decades\", according to historian Lillian Faderman.\nGreat Depression.\nThe primary component necessary to encourage lesbians to be public and seek other women was economic independence, which virtually disappeared in the 1930s with the Great Depression. Independent women in the 1930s were generally seen as holding jobs that men should have. Most lesbians in the U.S. found it necessary to marry, engaging either in traditional marriages or \"front\" marriages to a gay man where both could discreetly pursue homosexual relationships.\nThe hostile social attitude led to the formation of small, close-knit, bar-centric communities in large cities. Women in other locales typically remained isolated. Speaking of homosexuality in any context was socially forbidden. Slang terms referred to openly gay people as \"in the Life\".\nHomosexual subculture disappeared in Germany with the rise of the Nazis in 1933.\nAmerican First Lady from 1933 to 1945, Eleanor Roosevelt, exchanged rings with and wrote daily letters to journalist Lorena Hickok, expressing her love for Hickok, using endearments, and expressing a desire to kiss her.\nWorld War II.\nThe onset of World War II caused a massive upheaval in people's lives as military mobilization engaged millions of men. Women were also accepted into the military in the U.S. Women's Army Corps (WACs) and U.S. Navy's Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service (WAVES). Unlike processes to screen out male homosexuals, which had been in place since the creation of the American military, there were no methods to identify or screen for lesbians; they were put into place gradually during World War II. Despite common attitudes regarding women's traditional roles in the 1930s, independent and masculine women were directly recruited by the military in the 1940s, and frailty discouraged.\nSome women arrived at the recruiting station in a man's suit, denied ever being in love with another woman, and were easily inducted. Sexual activity was forbidden and blue discharge was almost certain if one identified oneself as a lesbian. As women found each other, they formed into tight groups on base, socialized at service clubs, and began to use code words. Historian Allan B\u00e9rub\u00e9 documented that homosexuals in the armed forces either consciously or subconsciously refused to identify themselves as homosexual or lesbian, and also never spoke about others' orientation.104\nThe most masculine women were not necessarily common, though they were visible, so they tended to attract women interested in finding other lesbians. Women had to broach the subject about their interest in other women carefully, sometimes taking days to develop a common understanding without asking or stating anything outright.100\nWomen who did not enter the military were aggressively called upon to take industrial jobs left by men, in order to continue national productivity. The increased mobility, sophistication, and independence of many women during and after the war made it possible for women to live without husbands, something that would not have been feasible under different economic and social circumstances, further shaping lesbian networks and environments.\nIn Germany, there was no explicit law against lesbianism. Lesbians who were Jewish, Roma, or politically dissident, were persecuted primarily for these other characteristics. Prior to 1939, lesbians were imprisoned as 'asocials', which was \"a broad category applied to all people who evaded Nazi rule.\" Asocials were identified with an inverted black triangle. In the 1990s in the U.S., some lesbians used the black triangle symbol as an identifier, and the pink triangle was also used for the combined lesbian-gay movement.\nPostwar.\nFollowing World War II, a nationwide movement pressed to return to pre-war society as quickly as possible in the U.S. Partially due to the increasing national paranoia about communism and the pervasiveness of psychoanalytic theory, the U.S. government began persecuting homosexuals around 1950. The government fired open homosexuals and began a widespread effort to gather intelligence about employees' private lives.277 The U.S. military and government conducted interrogations of women's sexual histories. State and local governments followed suit, arresting people for congregating in bars and parks, and enacting laws against cross-dressing for both sexes.\nPostwar practices to eliminate homosexuals from public service positions also began to Australia, Canada, and the UK. A section to create an offence of \"gross indecency\" between females was added to a bill in the United Kingdom House of Commons and passed there in 1921, but was rejected in the House of Lords, apparently because they were concerned any attention paid to sexual misconduct would also promote it.\nConcurrently with government persecution, in 1952, homosexuality was listed as a pathological emotional disturbance in the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual\".247 The view that homosexuality was a curable sickness was widely believed in the medical community, general population, and among many lesbians themselves.\nVery little information was available about homosexuality beyond medical and psychiatric texts. Community meeting places consisted of bars that were commonly raided by police, with those arrested exposed in newspapers. In response, eight women in San Francisco met in their living rooms in 1955 to socialize and have a safe place to dance. When they decided to make it a regular meeting, they became the first organization for lesbians in the U.S., titled the Daughters of Bilitis (DOB). In 1956, the DOB began publishing a magazine titled \"The Ladder\". \"The Ladder\" was mailed to hundreds\u2014eventually thousands\u2014of DOB members discussing the nature of homosexuality, sometimes challenging the idea that it was a sickness, with readers offering their own reasons why they were lesbians and suggesting ways to cope with the condition or society's response to it. British lesbians followed with the publication of \"Arena Three\" beginning in 1964, with a similar mission.\nButch and femme dichotomy.\nEarly working-class lesbian subculture in the U.S. and Canada developed rigid gender roles. These roles dated back to Harlem and Greenwich Village in the 1920s. In this subculture, a couple was defined as \"dichotomous individuals, if not male and female, then butch and femme\". Although many municipalities enacted laws against cross-dressing, some women (\"butches\") would socialize in bars dressed in men's clothing and mirroring traditional masculine behavior. Others (\"femmes\") wore traditionally feminine clothing. Butch and femme modes of socialization were so integral within lesbian bars that women who refused to choose between the two would be ignored, or at least unable to date anyone, and butch/butch or femme/femme romantic relationships were unacceptable.\nBy the 1950s and 1960s, the roles were pervasive and not limited to North America: from 1940 to 1970, butch/femme bar culture flourished in Britain, though there were fewer class distinctions than in lesbian communities in the U.S. Butch and femme were considered coarse by American lesbians of higher social standing during this period.\nFiction.\nRegardless of the lack of information about homosexuality in scholarly texts, another forum for learning about lesbianism was growing. A paperback book titled \"Women's Barracks\" describing a woman's experiences in the Free French Forces was published in 1950. It told of a lesbian relationship the author had witnessed. After 4.5 million copies were sold, it was consequently named in the House Select Committee on Current Pornographic Materials in 1952. Its publisher, Gold Medal Books, followed with the novel \"Spring Fire\" in 1952, which sold 1.5 million copies. Gold Medal Books was overwhelmed with mail from women writing about the subject matter, and followed with more books, creating the genre of lesbian pulp fiction.\nBetween 1955 and 1969, over 2,000 books were published using lesbianism as a topic, and they were sold in corner drugstores, train stations, bus stops, and newsstands all over the U.S. and Canada. Literary scholar, Yvonne Keller created several subclasses for lesbian pulp fiction, to help highlight the differences between the types of pulp fiction being released. Virile adventures were written by authors using male pseudonyms, and almost all were marketed to heterosexual men. During this time, another subclass emerged called \"Pro-Lesbian\". The emergence of pro-lesbian fiction began with authors seeing the voyeuristic and homophobic nature of virile adventures. With only a handful of lesbian pulp fiction authors were women writing for lesbians, including Ann Bannon, Valerie Taylor, Paula Christian, and Vin Packer/Ann Aldrich. These authors focused on the relationship between the women instead of writing sexually explicit material, defying the standards of the \"virile adventure\" model.\nThe differences between virile adventures and pro-lesbian covers and titles were distinct enough that Bannon, who also purchased lesbian pulp fiction, later stated that women identified the material iconically by the cover art. Pro-lesbian covers were innocuous and hinted at their lesbian themes, and virile adventures ranged from having one woman partially undressed to sexually explicit covers, to demonstrate the invariably salacious material inside. In addition to this, coded words and images were used on the covers. Instead of \"lesbian\", terms such as \"strange\", \"twilight\", \"queer\", and \"third sex\", were used in the titles. Many of the books used cultural references: naming places, terms, describing modes of dress and other codes to isolated women. As a result, pulp fiction helped to proliferate a lesbian identity simultaneously to lesbians and heterosexual readers.\nSecond-wave feminism / Late 1960s-1980s.\nThe social rigidity of the 1950s and early 1960s encountered a backlash as social movements to improve the standing of African Americans, the poor, women, and gays all became prominent. The gay rights movement and the feminist movement connected after a violent confrontation occurred in New York City in the 1969 Stonewall riots.\nFrom the late 1950s to the 1970s, the sexual revolution took place, and many women took advantage of their new social freedom to try new experiences. Women who previously identified as heterosexual tried sex with women, though many maintained their heterosexual identity.203\nFrom the 1960s to the 1980s, the movement of second-wave feminism developed. Lesbianism as a political identity grew to describe a social philosophy among women, often overshadowing sexual desire as a defining trait. Different groups and authors defined \"lesbian\" as \"the rage of all women condensed to the point of explosion\".,70 \"a woman-identified woman who does not fuck men. It does not mean compulsory sexual activity with women.\",177 \nor \"a woman whose primary erotic, psychological, emotional and social interest is in a member of her own sex[...].\".7 Women who subscribed to this philosophy dubbed themselves lesbian-feminists. In the ideal society, named Lesbian Nation, \"woman\" and \"lesbian\" were interchangeable.\nSeparatist feminists expressed their disdain with an inherently sexist and patriarchal society, and concluded the most effective way to overcome sexism and attain the equality of women would be to deny men any power or pleasure from women. Many believers strove to separate themselves physically and economically from traditional male-centered culture. As equality was a priority for lesbian-feminists, disparity of roles between men and women or butch and femme were viewed as patriarchal. Lesbian-feminists also eschewed the perceived chauvinism of gay men; many lesbian-feminists refused to work with men, or take up their causes.\nAlthough lesbian-feminism was a significant shift, not all lesbians agreed with it. Lesbian-feminism was a youth-oriented movement: its members were primarily college educated, with experience in New Left and radical causes, but they had not seen any success in persuading radical organizations to take up women's issues.11 Many older lesbians who had acknowledged their sexuality in more conservative times felt maintaining their ways of coping in a homophobic world was more appropriate. Lesbians who believed they were born homosexual, and used the descriptor \"lesbian\" to define sexual attraction, often considered the separatist opinions of lesbian-feminists to be detrimental to the cause of gay rights.\nIn 1970, the Daughters of Bilitis folded over which direction to focus on: feminism or gay rights issues.\nFrom 1974 to 1993, the organization Salsa Soul Sisters, today known as the African Ancestral Lesbians United for Societal Change, was a lesbian womanist organization operating in New York City.55\nIn October 1980, the First Black Lesbian Conference was held, an outgrowth from the First National Third World Lesbian and Gay Conference.\nThird-wave feminism / 1980s-2000s.\nIn the 1980s, a significant movement rejected the desexualization of lesbianism by cultural feminists, causing a heated controversy called the feminist sex wars. Butch and femme roles returned, although not as strictly followed as they were in the 1950s. They became a mode of chosen sexual self-expression for some women in the 1990s. Once again, women felt safer claiming to be more sexually adventurous, and sexual flexibility became more accepted.\nIn 1997, Marxist political activist Angela Davis came out a lesbian in an interview with \"Out\" magazine.\nLesbians of color.\n\"Lesbians of color\" is an umbrella term for Black, Latina, Asian, Arab, Native American, and other non-white lesbians. Lesbians of color have often been a marginalized group, and experienced racism in addition to homophobia and misogyny.\nSome scholars have noted that past lesbian communities were primarily white and American, and that some lesbians of color had difficulties integrating into these communities at large. Many lesbians of color have stated that they were often systematically excluded from lesbian spaces based on the fact that they are women of color. The early lesbian feminist movement was criticized for excluding race and class issues from their spaces and for a lack of focus on issues that did not benefit white women.\nAdditionally, lesbians of color face unique sets of challenges within their respective racial communities, as communities of color often view homosexuality as a \"white\" lifestyle and see the acceptance of homosexuality as a setback in achieving equality. Lesbians of color, especially those of immigrant populations, often hold the sentiment that their orientation adversely affects assimilation into the dominant culture. Within racial communities, the decision to come out can be costly, as the threat of loss of support from family, friends, and the community at large is probable. Lesbians of color are often exposed to a range of adverse consequences, including microaggression, discrimination, menace, and violence.\nAudre Lorde, Barbara Smith, and Cherrie Moraga are cited as major theorists within the various lesbians of color movements for their insistence on inclusion and equality, from both racial communities and white lesbian communities.\nThe many intersections surrounding lesbians of color can often contribute to an increased need for mental health resources. Lesbians of color are more likely to experience a number of psychological issues due to the various experiences of sexism, racism, and homophobia. Mental health providers often use heteronormative standards to gauge the health of lesbian relationships, and the relationships of lesbian women of color are often subjects of judgment because they are seen as the most deviant.\nNative North America.\nSome Indigenous peoples of the Americas conceptualize a third gender for women who dress as, and fulfill the roles usually filled by, men in their cultures. In other cases they may use different terms for feminine women and masculine women. These identities are rooted in the context of the ceremonial and cultural lives of the particular Indigenous cultures, and \"simply being gay and Indian does not make someone a Two-Spirit.\" These ceremonial and social roles, which are conferred and confirmed by the person's elders, \"do not make sense\" when defined by non-Native concepts of sexual orientation and gender identity. Rather, they must be understood in an Indigenous context, as traditional spiritual and social roles held by the person in their Indigenous community.\nTribal law can differ from colonial law. For example, the Navajo Nation's \"Din\u00e9 Marriage Act of 2005\", which bans recognition of specifically same-sex marriages performed outside the Nation, remains in place as of 2025 despite ongoing disputes.\nMiddle East.\nArabic-language historical records have used various terms to describe sexual practices between women. A common one is \"sahq\", which refers to rubbing. Lesbian practices and identities are largely absent from the historical record. The common term to describe lesbianism in Arabic today is essentially the same term used to describe men, and thus the distinction between male and female homosexuality is to a certain extent linguistically obscured in contemporary queer discourse. Overall, the study of contemporary lesbian experience in the region is complicated by power dynamics in the postcolonial context, shaped even by what some scholars refer to as \"homonationalism\", the use of politicized understanding of sexual categories to advance specific national interests on the domestic and international stage.\nWomen in the Middle East have been historically segregated from men. In the 7th and 8th centuries, some extraordinary women dressed in male attire when gender roles were less strict. The Caliphal court in Baghdad featured women who dressed as men, including false facial hair, but they competed with other women for the attentions of men.\nIn the ninth century, the Muslim philosopher al-Kindi, who was born and educated in modern-day Iraq, explicitly discusses lesbianism: \"Lesbianism is due to a vapor which, condensed, generates in the labia heat and an itch which only dissolve and become cold through friction and orgasm. When friction and orgasm take place, the heat turns into coldness because the liquid that a woman ejaculates in lesbian intercourse is cold whereas...\"\nIn the tenth century, the erotic writings \"Jawami ` al-ladhdha (Encyclopedia of Pleasure)\", by Abul Hasan Ali ibn Nasr al-Katib, was written also in modern-day Iraq. It describes a committed relationship between a Christian woman and an Arab woman in pre-Islamic Iraq, and the mourning process one went through when the other died.\nAccording to the 12th-century writings of Sharif al-Idrisi, highly intelligent women were more likely to be lesbians; their intellectual prowess put them on a more even par with men.\nWhile male-written accounts of lesbianism in the Middle East exist, a 1978 treatise about repression in Iran asserted that women were completely silenced: \"In the whole of Iranian history, [no woman] has been allowed to speak out for such tendencies ... To attest to lesbian desires would be an unforgivable crime.\" \nA lesbian anthropologist in 1991 visited Yemen and reported that women in the town she visited were unable to comprehend her romantic relationship to another woman. Women in Pakistan are expected to marry men; those who do not are ostracized. Women may have intimate relations with other women as long as their wifely duties are met, their private matters are kept quiet, and the woman with whom they are involved is somehow related by family or logical interest to her lover.\nIndividuals identifying with or otherwise engaging in lesbian practices in the region can face family violence and societal persecution, including \"honor killings\". The justifications provided by murderers relate to a person's perceived sexual immorality, loss of virginity (outside of acceptable frames of marriage), and target female victims primarily.\nLesbians also face government persecution in the Middle East. In Yemen, homosexuality is criminalized, and women can face lashings, up to three years in prison or the death penalty for consensual lesbian sex. In 2017, the Egyptian government arrested and tortured out lesbian and activist Sarah Hegazi after she flew a rainbow flag at a concert.\nLatin America.\nIn Latin America, lesbian subcultures increased as several countries transitioned to or reformed democratic governments. However, social harassment has been common even in places where homosexuality is legal. Laws against child corruption, morality, or \"the good ways\" (\"faltas a la moral o las buenas costumbres\") have been used to persecute homosexuals. Lesbian groups and advocacy have faced repression in many countries where dictators have seized power, including Argentina.\nArgentinian lesbian group \"Nuestro Mundo\" (NM) was created in 1969.\nMexican lesbian group \"Lesbos\" was founded in 1977. In 1997, 13 lesbian organizations were active in Mexico City.\nIn Chile, the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet forbade the creation of lesbian groups until 1984. The first lesbian group \"Ayuquel\u00e9n\" (\"joy of being\" in Mapuche) was first founded in 1984, prompted by the very public homophobic murder of a woman. \"Ayuquel\u00e9n\" worked to remove the sodomy laws then in place in Chile.\nIn Nicaragua in 1986, the Sandinista National Liberation Front expelled gay men and lesbians from its midst. State persecution prevented the formation of associations until AIDS became a concern, when educational efforts forced sexual minorities to band together. The first lesbian organization was \"Nosotras\", founded in 1989. An effort to promote visibility from 1991 to 1992 provoked the government to declare homosexuality illegal in 1994, effectively ending the movement until 2004, when \"Grupo Safo\u00a0\u2013 Grupo de Mujeres Lesbianas de Nicaragua\" was created, four years before homosexuality became legal again.\nAfrica.\nFounded in 2004 in Namibia, the Coalition of African Lesbians is a pan-Africanist, radical feminist network of fourteen nonprofits across ten African countries, working to eradicate stigma, legal discrimination, and violence against lesbians.\nCross-gender roles and marriage between women has also been recorded in over 30 traditional African societies.262 Women may marry other women, raise their children, and be generally thought of as men in societies in Nigeria, Cameroon, and Kenya. The Hausa people of Sudan have a term equivalent to lesbian, \"kifi\", that may also be applied to males to mean \"neither party insists on a particular sexual role\".259\nNear the Congo River, a female who participates in strong emotional or sexual relationships with another female among the Nkundo people is known as \"yaikya bons\u00e1ngo\" (a woman who presses against another woman). Lesbian relationships are also known in matrilineal societies in Ghana among the Akan people. In Lesotho, females engage in what is commonly considered sexual behavior to the Western world: they kiss, sleep together, rub genitals, participate in cunnilingus, and maintain their relationships with other females vigilantly. Since the people of Lesotho believe sex requires a penis, they do not consider their behavior sexual, nor label themselves lesbians.\nIn Tanzania, lesbians are known as or called \"Msagaji\" (singular), \"Wasagaji\" (plural), which in Swahili means grinder or grinding because of the perceived nature of lesbian sex that would involve the mutual rubbing of vulvas.\nCorrective rape is reported to be on the rise in South Africa. The crime is sometimes supervised by members of the woman's family or local community, and is a major contributor to HIV infection in South African lesbians. \"Corrective rape\" is not recognized by the South African legal system as a hate crime despite the fact that the South African Constitution states that no person shall be discriminated against based on their social status and identity, including sexual orientation. Legally, South Africa protects gay rights extensively, but the government has not taken proactive action to prevent corrective rape, and women do not have much faith in the police and their investigations. Local South African organizations including nonprofit \"Luleki Sizwe\" and The Triangle Project, between 500 (per Triangle Project) and 3600 (Luleki Sizwe) South Africans suffer from corrective rape every year, the vast majority of lesbians live in fear of corrective rape, and victims are less likely to report the crime because of their society's homophobia.\nAsia.\nChina before westernization was another society that segregated men from women. Historical Chinese culture has not recognized a concept of sexual orientation, or a framework to divide people based on their same-sex or opposite-sex attractions.29 Although there was a significant culture surrounding homosexual men, there was none for women. Outside their duties to bear sons to their husbands, women were perceived as having no sexuality at all.311\nThis did not mean that women could not pursue sexual relationships with other women, but that such associations could not impose upon women's relationships to men. Rare references to lesbianism were written by Ying Shao, who identified same-sex relationships between women in imperial courts who behaved as husband and wife as \"dui shi\" (paired eating). \"Golden Orchid Associations\" in Southern China existed into the 20th century and promoted formal marriages between women, who were then allowed to adopt children.187 Westernization brought new ideas that all sexual behavior not resulting in reproduction was aberrant.\nThe liberty of being employed in silk factories starting in 1865 allowed some women to style themselves \"tzu-shu nii\" (never to marry) and live in communes with other women. Other Chinese called them \"sou-hei\" (self-combers) for adopting hairstyles of married women. These communes passed because of the Great Depression and were subsequently discouraged by the communist government for being a relic of feudal China.195 In contemporary Chinese society, \"tongzhi\" (same goal or spirit) is the term used to refer to homosexuals; most Chinese are reluctant to divide this classification further to identify lesbians.28\nIn Japan, the term , a Japanese pronunciation of \"lesbian\", was used during the 1920s. Westernization brought more independence for women and allowed some Japanese women to wear pants.246 The cognate tomboy is used in the Philippines, and particularly in Manila, to denote women who are more masculine.122 Virtuous women in Korea prioritize motherhood, chastity, and virginity; outside this scope, very few women are free to express themselves through sexuality, although there is a growing organization for lesbians named .75 The term \"pondan\" is used in Malaysia to refer to gay men, but since there is no historical context to reference lesbians, the term is used for female homosexuals as well.145 As in many Asian countries, open homosexuality is discouraged in many social levels, so many Malaysians lead double lives.\nIn India, a 14th-century Indian text mentioning a lesbian couple who had a child as a result of their lovemaking is an exception to the general silence about female homosexuality. According to Ruth Vanita, this invisibility disappeared with the release of a film titled \"Fire\" in 1996, prompting some theaters in India to be attacked by religious extremists. Terms used to label homosexuals are often rejected by Indian activists for being the result of imperialist influence, but most discourse on homosexuality centers on men. Women's rights groups in India continue to debate the legitimacy of including lesbian issues in their platforms, as lesbians and material focusing on female homosexuality are frequently suppressed.\nDemographics.\nKinsey Report.\nThe most extensive early study of female homosexuality was provided by the Institute for Sex Research, who published an in-depth report of the sexual experiences of American women in 1953. More than 8,000 women were interviewed by Alfred Kinsey and the staff of the Institute for Sex Research for \"Kinsey Reports\". The reports' methodology was criticized during and after its publication.\nDespite the criticism, the reports were unexpectedly popular. They reported that 28% of women had been aroused by another female, and 19% had a sexual contact with another female.,453 and that around nine percent of the women had orgasmed.\nThe report's dispassionate discussion of homosexuality as a form of human sexual behavior was revolutionary. Up to this study, only physicians and psychiatrists studied sexual behavior, and almost always the results were interpreted with a moral view.\nHite Report.\nIn 1976, sexologist Shere Hite did a qualitative survey of 3,019 women on their sexual experiences, and published it as \"The Hite Report\". Hite's questions differed from Kinsey's, focusing more on how women identified and what they preferred, rather than their prior experiences. Respondents to Hite's questions indicated that 8% preferred sex with women and 9% answered that they identified as bisexual or had sexual experiences with men and women, though they refused to indicate preference.\nHite found it \"striking\" that many women who had no lesbian experiences indicated they were interested in sex with women, particularly because the question was not asked. Hite found the two most significant differences between respondents' experience with men and women were the focus on clitoral stimulation, and more emotional involvement and orgasmic responses.\nPopulation estimates.\nLesbians in the U.S. are estimated to be about 2.6% of the population, according to a 2000 survey. Another American survey showed that between 2000 and 2005, the number of people claiming to be in same-sex relationships increased by 30%\u2014five times the rate of population growth in the U.S. The study attributed the jump to people being more comfortable self-identifying as homosexual to the federal government.\nA survey by the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS) in 2010 found that 1.5% of Britons identified themselves as gay or bisexual, and the ONS suggests that this is in line with other surveys showing the number between 0.3% and 3%.\nPolls in Australia recorded a range of self-identified lesbian or bisexual women from 1.3% to 2.2% of the total population.\nHealth.\nPhysical.\nMedical research and care sometimes use the term women who have sex with women (WSW) instead of lesbian.\nIn a 2006 American survey of 2,345 lesbian and bisexual women, only 9.3% had ever been asked their sexual orientation by a physician. A third of the women had received a negative reaction from a medical professional after identifying themselves as lesbian or bisexual.\nWhen women do seek medical attention, medical professionals often fail to take a complete medical history. A patient's complete history helps medical professionals identify higher risk areas. In a 1995 U.S. survey of 6,935 self-identified lesbians, 77% had had one or more lifetime male sexual partners, and 6% had that contact within the previous year.\nCancer.\nThe risk factors for developing ovarian cancer rates are higher in lesbians than heterosexual women, perhaps because many lesbians lack the protective factors of pregnancy, abortion, contraceptives, breast feeding, and miscarriages.\nMany lesbians neglect to see a physician because they do not participate in heterosexual activity and require no birth control, which is the initiating factor for most women to seek consultation with a gynecologist when they become sexually active.359 As a result, many lesbians are not screened for cancer regularly with Pap smears.\nLifestyle factors.\nFactors that add to risk of heart disease include obesity and smoking, both of which are more prevalent among lesbians. Studies show that lesbians are generally less concerned about weight issues than heterosexual women; and lesbians consider women with higher body masses to be more attractive than heterosexual women do. Research is needed to determine specific causes of obesity and smoking in lesbians.\nLesbians are more likely to exercise regularly than heterosexual women. Lesbians, unlike heterosexual women, do not generally exercise for aesthetic reasons.\nSexual health.\nSome sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are communicable between women, including human papillomavirus (HPV), trichomoniasis, syphilis, and herpes simplex virus (HSV). Transmission of specific STIs among women who have sex with women depends on the sexual practices women engage in. Any object that comes in contact with cervical secretions, vaginal mucosa, or menstrual blood, including fingers or penetrative objects may transmit STIs. Orogenital contact may indicate a higher risk of acquiring HSV, even among women who have had no sex with men.\nBacterial vaginosis (BV) occurs more often in lesbians, but it is unclear if BV is transmitted by sexual contact; it occurs in celibate as well as sexually active women. BV often occurs in both partners in a lesbian relationship; a recent study of women with BV found that 81% had partners with BV.\nLesbians do not frequently transmit human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), although transmission is possible through vaginal and cervical secretions. The highest rate of transmission of HIV to lesbians is from intravenous drug use or sex with women who have sexual intercourse with bisexual men.\nMental.\nLesbian women report feeling significantly different and isolated during adolescence.153 These emotions have been cited as appearing on average at 15 years old in lesbians and 18 years old in bisexual women.\nMore than half the respondents to a 1994 survey of health issues in lesbians reported they had suicidal thoughts, and 18% had attempted suicide.70 American studies in the 2010s and 2020s have found that LGBT people experience higher rates of mental distress, and that this relationship is mediated by experiences of rejection and adverse childhood experiences.\nDepression is reported among lesbians at a rate similar to heterosexual women.69 Depression is a more significant problem among women who feel they must hide their sexual orientation from friends and family, or experience compounded ethnic or religious discrimination, or endure relationship difficulties with no support system. Generalized anxiety disorder is more likely to appear among lesbian and bisexual women than heterosexual women.\nStudies have shown that heterosexual men and lesbians have different standards for what they consider attractive in women. Lesbians who view themselves with male standards of female beauty may experience lower self-esteem, eating disorders, and higher incidence of depression.\nA population-based study completed by the National Alcohol Research Center found that lesbians and bisexual women are less likely than heterosexual women to abstain from alcohol, and have a higher likelihood of reporting problems with alcohol, as well as not being satisfied with treatment for substance abuse programs. Many lesbian communities are centered in bars, and drinking is an activity that correlates to community participation for lesbians and bisexual women.81\nMedia representation.\nThe majority of media about lesbians has been produced by men; women's publishing companies did not develop until the 1970s, films about lesbians made by women did not appear until the 1980s, and women-written television shows portraying lesbians written only began to be created in the 21st century. When depictions of lesbians began to surface, they were often one-dimensional, simplified stereotypes.\nLiterature.\nAncient lesbian writers include Sappho. \nAncient stories interpreted as examples of lesbianism include the Book of Ruth,108 Camilla and Diana, Artemis and Callisto, and Iphis and Ianthe.\nFor ten centuries after the fall of the Roman Empire, lesbianism disappeared from literature.11 Foster points to the particularly strict view that Eve\u2014representative of all women\u2014caused the downfall of mankind; original sin among women was a particular concern, especially because women were perceived as creating life. During this time, women were largely illiterate and discouraged from intellectual pursuit, and men shaped ideas about sexuality.6\nIn the 15th and 16th centuries, French and English depictions of relationships between women, writers' attitudes spanned from amused tolerance to arousal. Physical relationships between women were often encouraged, as long as they did not supersede heterosexual relationships; there was a cultural belief that lesbian sex and relationships could not be as fulfilling as heterosexual sex and relationships. At worst, if a woman became enamored of another woman, she became a tragic figure. Male intervention into relationships between women was necessary only when women acted as men and demanded the same social privileges.\nIn the 18th century, writings mentioning lesbianism included the 1749 English erotica \"Fanny Hill\" and the 1778 erotica \"L'Espion Anglais\".\nLesbianism became almost exclusive to French literature in the 19th century, based on male fantasy and the desire to shock bourgeois moral values. Honor\u00e9 de Balzac, in \"The Girl with the Golden Eyes\" (1835), employed lesbianism in his story about three people living amongst the moral degeneration of Paris, and again in later works. His work influenced novelist Th\u00e9ophile Gautier's \"Mademoiselle de Maupin\", which provided the first description of a physical type that became associated with lesbians: tall, wide-shouldered, slim-hipped, and athletically inclined. Charles Baudelaire repeatedly used lesbianism as a theme in his poems \"Lesbos\", (\"Damned Women\"), and .435\nReflecting French society, as well as employing stock character associations, many of the lesbian characters in 19th-century French literature were prostitutes or courtesans: personifications of vice who died early, violent deaths in moral endings. Samuel Taylor Coleridge's 1816 poem \"Christabel\" and the novella \"Carmilla\" (1872) by Sheridan Le Fanu both present lesbianism associated with vampirism.\nGradually, women began to write, and began to write about lesbian relationships. Until the 1920s, most major works involving lesbianism were penned by men. Foster suggests that women would have encountered suspicion about their own lives had they used same-sex love as a topic, and that some writers including Louise Lab\u00e9, Charlotte Charke, and Margaret Fuller either changed the pronouns in their literary works to male, or made them ambiguous. Author George Sand was portrayed as a character in several works in the 19th century; writer Mario Praz credited the popularity of lesbianism as a theme to Sand's appearance in Paris society in the 1830s.\nIn the 20th century, Katherine Mansfield, Amy Lowell, Gertrude Stein, H.D., Vita Sackville-West, Virginia Woolf, and Gale Wilhelm wrote popular works that had same-sex relationships as themes.182 In 1928, \"The Well of Loneliness\" and three other novels with lesbian themes were published in England: Elizabeth Bowen's \"The Hotel\", Woolf's \"\", and Compton Mackenzie's satirical novel \"Extraordinary Women\". Unlike \"The Well of Loneliness\", none of these other novels were banned.\nAs the paperback book came into fashion, lesbian themes were relegated to pulp fiction. Many of the pulp novels typically presented very unhappy women, or relationships that ended tragically. Marijane Meaker later wrote that she was told to make the relationship end badly in \"Spring Fire\" because the publishers were concerned about the books being confiscated by the U.S. Postal Service. Patricia Highsmith, writing as Claire Morgan, wrote \"The Price of Salt\" in 1951 and refused to follow this directive.\nIn the 1970s, lesbian feminist magazines such as \"The Furies\" and \"Sinister Wisdom\" began publication.\nWell-known writers who wrote on lesbian topics or about lesbian-themed plots included Rita Mae Brown, Dorothy Allison,377\u2013379 Audre Lorde, and Cherr\u00ede Moraga.379\nFilm.\nLesbianism, or the suggestion of it, began early in filmmaking. The same constructs of how lesbians were portrayed\u2014or for what reasons\u2014as what had appeared in literature were placed on women in the films. Women challenging their feminine roles was a device more easily accepted than men challenging masculine ones. Actresses appeared as men in male roles because of plot devices as early as 1914 in \"A Florida Enchantment\" featuring Edith Storey. In \"Morocco\" (1930) Marlene Dietrich kisses another woman on the lips, and Katharine Hepburn plays a man in \"Christopher Strong\" in 1933 and again in \"Sylvia Scarlett\" (1936). Hollywood films followed the same trend set by audiences who flocked to Harlem to see edgy shows that suggested bisexuality.\nOvert female homosexuality was introduced in the 1929 film \"Pandora's Box\". German films depicting homosexuality were distributed throughout Europe, but 1931's \"M\u00e4dchen in Uniform\" was not distributed in the U.S. because of the depiction of an adolescent's love for a female teacher in boarding school.58\nAfter the introduction of the Hays Code in the U.S. in 1930, most references to homosexuality in American films were censored. The originally-lesbian play \"The Children's Hour\" was converted into a heterosexual love triangle and retitled \"These Three\". The 1933 biopic \"Queen Christina\" veiled most of the speculation about Christina of Sweden's affairs with women.58 Censors removed a lesbian scene from the 1951 film \"The Pit of Loneliness\", saying that it was \"Immoral, would tend to corrupt morals\".102 The code was relaxed somewhat after 1961, and the next year William Wyler remade \"The Children's Hour\" with Audrey Hepburn and Shirley MacLaine. After MacLaine's character admits her love for Hepburn's, she hangs herself; this set a precedent for miserable endings in films addressing homosexuality.139\nGay characters also were often killed off at the end, such as the death of Sandy Dennis' character at the end of \"The Fox\" in 1968. If not victims, lesbians were depicted as villains or morally corrupt, such as portrayals of brothel madames by Barbara Stanwyck in \"Walk on the Wild Side\" from 1962 and Shelley Winters in \"The Balcony\" in 1963. Lesbians as predators were presented in \"Rebecca\" (1940), women's prison films like \"Caged\" (1950), or in the character Rosa Klebb in \"From Russia with Love\" (1963). Lesbian vampire themes have reappeared in \"Dracula's Daughter\" (1936), \"Blood and Roses\" (1960), \"Vampyros Lesbos\" (1971), and \"The Hunger\" (1983).49 \"Basic Instinct\" (1992) featured a bisexual murderer played by Sharon Stone; it was one of several films that set off a storm of protests about the depiction of gay people as predators.\nThe first film to address lesbianism with significant depth was \"The Killing of Sister George\" in 1968, which was filmed in The Gateways Club, a longstanding lesbian pub in London. Film historian Vito Russo considers the film a complex treatment of a multifaceted, openly lesbian character who is forced into silence about her orientation by other lesbians. \"Personal Best\" in 1982, and \"Lianna\" in 1983 treated lesbian relationships more sympathetically and showed lesbian sex scenes, though in neither film are the relationships happy ones. \"Personal Best\" was criticized for engaging in the clich\u00e9d plot device of one woman returning to a relationship with a man, implying that lesbianism is a phase, as well as treating the lesbian relationship with \"undisguised voyeurism\". More ambiguous portrayals of lesbian characters were seen in \"Silkwood\" (1983), \"The Color Purple\" (1985), and \"Fried Green Tomatoes\" (1991), despite explicit lesbianism in the source material.\nAn era of independent filmmaking brought different stories, writers, and directors to films. \"Desert Hearts\" (1985) was directed by lesbian Donna Deitch, and is loosely based on Jane Rule's novel \"Desert of the Heart\". It received mixed critical commentary, but earned positive reviews from the gay press. The late 1980s and early 1990s ushered in a series of films treating gay and lesbian issues seriously, made by gays and lesbians, nicknamed New Queer Cinema.237 Films using lesbians as a subject included Rose Troche's avant garde romantic comedy \"Go Fish\" (1994) and the first film about African American lesbians, Cheryl Dunye's \"The Watermelon Woman\", in 1995.\nLater lesbian films included \"The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love\" (1995), \"When Night Is Falling\" (1995), \"Better Than Chocolate\" (1999), and the social satire \"But I'm a Cheerleader\" (1999).270 A twist on the lesbian-as-predator theme was the added complexity of motivations of lesbian characters in the Oscar-winning biopic of Aileen Wuornos, \"Monster\" (2003).\nTheatre.\nThe first stage production to feature a lesbian kiss and open depiction of two women in love is the 1907 Yiddish play \"God of Vengeance\" (\"Got fun nekome\") by Sholem Asch. Rivkele, a young woman, and Manke, a prostitute in her father's brothel, fall in love. On March 6, 1923, during a performance of the play in a New York City theatre, producers and cast were informed that they had been indicted by a Grand Jury for violating the Penal Code that defined the presentation of \"an obscene, indecent, immoral and impure theatrical production.\" They were arrested the following day when they appeared before a judge. Two months later, they were found guilty in a jury trial. The producers were fined $200 and the cast received suspended sentences. The play is considered by some to be \"the greatest drama of the Yiddish theater\". \"God of Vengeance\" was the inspiration for the 2015 play \"Indecent\" by Paula Vogel, which features lesbian characters Rifkele and Manke. \"Indecent\" was nominated for multiple 2017 Tony Awards.\nBroadway musical \"The Prom\" featured lesbian characters Emma Nolan and Alyssa Greene. In 2019, the production was nominated for six Tony Awards, including Best Musical, and received the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Musical. A performance from \"The Prom\" was included in the 2018 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade and made history by showing the first same-sex kiss in the parade's broadcast. \"Jagged Little Pill\" featured lesbian character Jo, who is dealing with her religious mother's disapproval.\nTelevision.\nTelevision began to address homosexuality much later than film. Local talk shows in the late 1950s first addressed homosexuality by inviting panels of experts (usually not gay themselves) to discuss the problems of gay men in society. Lesbianism was rarely included. The first time a lesbian was portrayed on network television was the NBC drama \"The Eleventh Hour\" in the early 1960s, which ended with the lesbian character being \"converted\" to heterosexuality.\nLesbian invisibility in TV continued into the 1970s, even as male homosexuality and coming-out reveals became the subject of dramas (\"\", \"Marcus Welby, M.D.\", \"Medical Center\"). These shows allowed homosexuality to be discussed clinically, with the main characters guiding troubled gay characters or correcting homophobic antagonists, while simultaneously comparing homosexuality to psychosis, criminal behavior, or drug use.\nAnother stock plot device in the 1970s was the gay character in a police drama. They served as victims of blackmail or anti-gay violence, but more often as criminals. Beginning in the late 1960s with \"N.Y.P.D.\", \"Police Story\", and \"Police Woman\", the use of homosexuals in stories became much more prevalent. Lesbians were included as villains, motivated to murder by their desires, internalized homophobia, or fear of being exposed as homosexual. One episode of \"Police Woman\" earned protests by the National Gay Task Force before it aired for portraying a trio of murderous lesbians who killed retirement home patients for their money.68 NBC edited the episode because of the protests, but a sit-in was staged in the head of NBC's offices.\nIn the middle of the 1970s, gay men and lesbians began to appear as police officers or detectives. Other shows, such as the 1982\"Cagney &amp; Lacey\" made conscious attempts to soften the two ground-breaking two female detective characters so they would not appear to be lesbians. In 1991, a bisexual lawyer character on \"L.A. Law\" shared the first significant lesbian kiss on primetime television, stirring a controversy despite being labeled \"chaste\" by \"The Hollywood Reporter\".89\nThough television did not begin to use recurring homosexual characters until the late 1980s, some early situation comedies used a stock character that author Stephen Tropiano calls \"gay-straight\": supporting characters who were quirky, did not comply with gender norms, or had ambiguous personal lives, that \"for all purposes \"'should' be gay\". These included Zelda from \"The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis\", Miss Hathaway from \"The Beverly Hillbillies\", and Jo from \"The Facts of Life\". In the mid-1980s through the 1990s, sitcoms frequently employed a \"coming out\" episode, where a friend of one of the stars admits she is a lesbian, forcing the cast to deal with the issue. \"Designing Women\", \"The Golden Girls\", and \"Friends\" used this device.\nRecurring openly lesbian characters were seen on \"Married... with Children\", \"Mad About You\", and \"Roseanne\", in which a highly publicized episode. By far the sitcom with the most significant impact to the image of lesbians was \"Ellen\", which generated enormous publicity from the 1997 coming out episode; Ellen DeGeneres appeared on the cover of \"Time\" magazine with the headline \"Yep, I'm Gay\". Parties were held in many U.S. cities to watch the episode, and the opposition from conservative organizations was intense. WBMA-LP, the ABC affiliate in Birmingham, Alabama, refused to air the first run of the episode, citing conservative values of the local viewing audience. Even as \"The Puppy Episode\" won an Emmy for writing, network executives cancelled the Ellen show.\nDramas following \"L.A. Law\" began incorporating homosexual themes, particularly with continuing storylines on \"Relativity\", \"Picket Fences\", \"ER\", ' and ', all of which tested the boundaries of sexuality and gender roles. A popular show directed at adolescents was \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\". In the fourth season of \"Buffy\", Tara and Willow admit their love for each other without any special fanfare and the relationship is treated as are the other romantic relationships on the show.\nIn the 2000s came network television series devoted solely to gay characters. Showtime's American rendition of \"Queer as Folk\" ran from 2000 to 2005; two of the main characters were a lesbian couple. Showtime promoted the series as \"No Limits\", and \"Queer as Folk\" addressed homosexuality graphically. The aggressive advertising paid off as the show became the network's highest rated, doubling the numbers of other Showtime programs after the first season. In 2004, Showtime introduced \"The L Word\", a dramatic series devoted to a group of lesbian and bisexual women, which ran for six seasons and was then temporarily rebooted in 2019.\nChic and popular culture.\nLesbian visibility has improved since the early 1980s. This is in part due to public figures who have drawn speculation and/or comment from the public and the press about their sexuality. The primary figure earning this attention was Martina Navratilova, who served as tabloid fodder for years as she denied being lesbian, admitted to being bisexual, had very public relationships with Rita Mae Brown and Judy Nelson, and acquired as much press about her sexuality as she did her athletic achievements.\nOther public figures acknowledged their homosexuality, such as musicians k.d. lang and Melissa Etheridge. Madonna pushed sexual boundaries in her performances. In 1993, heterosexual supermodel Cindy Crawford posed for a cover of \"Vanity Fair\" in a provocative arrangement that showed Crawford pretending to shave k.d. lang's face. The image \"became an internationally recognized symbol of the phenomenon of lesbian chic\".\nThe year 1994 marked a rise in lesbian visibility, particularly appealing to women with feminine appearances. Between 1992 and 1994, \"Mademoiselle\", \"Vogue\", \"Cosmopolitan\", \"Glamour\", \"Newsweek\", and \"New York\" magazines featured stories about women who admitted sexual histories with other women.\nOne analyst reasoned the recurrence of lesbian chic was due to the often-used homoerotic subtexts of gay male subculture being considered off-limits because of AIDS in the late 1980s and 1990s, joined with the distant memory of lesbians as they appeared in the 1970s: unattractive and militant. In short, lesbians became more attractive to general audiences when they ceased having political convictions. All the attention on feminine and glamorous women created what culture analyst Rodger Streitmatter characterizes as an unrealistic image of lesbians packaged by heterosexual men; the trend influenced an increase in the inclusion of lesbian material in pornography aimed at men.\nA resurgence of lesbian visibility was noted in 2009 when sexually fluid female celebrities, such as Cynthia Nixon and Lindsay Lohan, commented openly about their relationships with women, and reality television addressed same-sex relationships. Psychiatrists and feminist philosophers wrote that the rise in women acknowledging same-sex relationships was due to growing social acceptance, but also conceded that \"only a certain kind of lesbian\u2014slim and elegant or butch in just the right androgynous way\u2014is acceptable to mainstream culture.\"\nLegal Rights.\nCustody and Parenting.\nFamily issues were significant concerns for lesbians when gay activism became more vocal in the 1960s and 1970s. Custody issues in particular were of interest since often courts would not award custody to mothers who were openly homosexual, even though the general procedure acknowledged children were awarded to the biological mother.182\nSeveral studies performed as a result of custody disputes compared outcomes for children of single lesbian mothers and single nonlesbian mothers. They found that children's mental health, happiness, overall adjustment, sexual orientation, and sex roles, were similar between both groups.\nThe ability to adopt domestically or internationally children or provide a home as a foster parent is also a political and family priority for many lesbians, as is improving access to artificial insemination.\nMarriage.\nBefore the 1970s, the idea that same-sex adults formed long-term committed relationships was unknown to many people. In the 1990s in the U.S., the majority of lesbians (between 60% and 80%) reported being in a long-term relationship.117 Sociologists credit the high number of paired women to women's higher propensity to commit to relationships. Unlike heterosexual relationships that tend to divide work based on sex roles, lesbian relationships divide chores evenly between both members. Studies have also reported that emotional bonds are closer in lesbian and gay relationships than heterosexual ones.\nAs of 2025, same-sex marriage is legal in thirty-nine countries.\nPersecution of Sexual Activity.\nAt least thirty-eight countries \"criminalize same-sex conduct regardless of sex or expressly criminalize sexual conduct between women\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17847", "revid": "498704", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17847", "title": "Lesbigay", "text": ""}
{"id": "17851", "revid": "46890682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17851", "title": "Lambda", "text": "Eleventh letter in the Greek alphabet\nLambda(; uppercase ', lowercase '; , ; , ), sometimes rendered lamda, labda or lamma, is the eleventh letter of the Greek alphabet, representing the voiced alveolar lateral approximant ; it derives from the Phoenician letter Lamed, and gave rise to Latin L and Cyrillic El (). In the system of Greek numerals, lambda has a value of 30. The ancient grammarians typically called it (, ) in Classical Greek times, whereas in Modern Greek it is (, ), while the spelling () was used (to varying degrees) throughout the lengthy transition between the two.\nIn early Greek alphabets, the shape and orientation of lambda varied. Most variants consisted of two straight strokes, one longer than the other, connected at their ends. The angle might be in the upper-left, lower-left (\"Western\" alphabets) or top (\"Eastern\" alphabets). Other variants had a vertical line with a horizontal or sloped stroke running to the right. With the general adoption of the Ionic alphabet, Greek settled on an angle at the top; the Romans put the angle at the lower-left.\nSymbol.\nUpper-case letter \u039b.\nExamples of the symbolic use of uppercase lambda include:\nLower-case letter \u03bb.\nExamples of the symbolic use of lowercase lambda include:\nLitra symbol.\nThe Roman and Byzantine (), which served as both the pound mass unit and liter volume unit, were abbreviated in Greek using lambda with modified forms of the iota subscript \u27e8\u03bb\u0345\u27e9. These are variously encoded in Unicode. The Ancient Greek Numbers Unicode block includes 10183 GREEK LITRA SIGN (\ud800\udd83) as well as \ud800\udd62, which is described as 10162 GREEK ACROPHONIC HERMIONIAN TEN but was much more common as a form of the litra sign. A variant of the sign can be formed from 0338 COMBINING LONG SOLIDUS OVERLAY and either 039B GREEK CAPITAL LETTER LAMDA (\u039b\u0338) or 03BB GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMDA (\u03bb\u0338).\nUnicode.\nUnicode uses the (Modern Greek-based) spelling \"lamda\" in character names, instead of \"lambda\", due to \"the pre-existing names in ISO 8859-7, as well as preferences expressed by the Greek National Body\". Latin versions of lambda were added to Unicode in 2024 for the Salishan and Wakashan languages in Canada.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17852", "revid": "49804461", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17852", "title": "Lore", "text": "Lore may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17856", "revid": "43579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17856", "title": "Lamiaceae", "text": "Family of flowering plants\nThe Lamiaceae or Labiatae are a family of flowering plants commonly known as the mint, deadnettle, or sage family. Many of the plants are aromatic in all parts and the family includes widely used culinary herbs like basil, mint, rosemary, sage, savory, marjoram, oregano, hyssop, thyme, lavender, and perilla, as well as traditional medicines such as catnip, skullcap, bee balm, wild dagga, and oriental motherwort.\nSome species are shrubs, trees (such as teak), or, rarely, vines. Many members of the family are widely cultivated, not only for their aromatic qualities, but also their ease of cultivation, since they are readily propagated by stem cuttings. Besides those grown for their edible leaves, some are grown for decorative foliage. Others are grown for seed, such as \"Salvia hispanica\" (chia), or for their edible tubers, such as \"Plectranthus edulis\", \"P.\u00a0esculentus\", \"P.\u00a0rotundifolius\", and \"Stachys affinis\" (Chinese artichoke). Many are also grown ornamentally, notably coleus, \"Plectranthus\", and many \"Salvia\" species and hybrids.\nThe family has a cosmopolitan distribution. The enlarged Lamiaceae contain about 236 genera and have been stated to contain 6,900 to 7,200 species, but the World Checklist lists 7,534. The largest genera are \"Salvia\" (900), \"Scutellaria\" (360), \"Stachys\" (300), \"Plectranthus\" (300), \"Hyptis\" (280), \"Teucrium\" (250), \"Vitex\" (250), \"Thymus\" (220), and \"Nepeta\" (200). \"Clerodendrum\" was once a genus of over 400 species, but by 2010, it had been narrowed to about 150.\nThe family has traditionally been considered closely related to the Verbenaceae; in the 1990s, phylogenetic studies suggested that many genera classified in the Verbenaceae should be classified in the Lamiaceae or to other families in the order Lamiales.\nThe alternative family name Labiatae refers to the flowers typically having petals fused into an upper lip and a lower lip (\"\" in Latin). Although this is still considered an acceptable alternative name, most botanists now use the name Lamiaceae in referring to this family. The flowers are bilaterally symmetrical with five united petals and five united sepals. They are usually bisexual and verticillastrate (a flower cluster that looks like a whorl of flowers, but actually consists of two crowded clusters). The leaves emerge oppositely, each pair at right angles to the previous one (decussate) or whorled. The stems are frequently square in cross section, but this trait is not found in all members of the family, and is sometimes found in other plant families.\nGenera.\nThe last revision of the entire family was published in 2004. It described and provided keys to 236 genera. These are marked with an asterisk (*) in the list below. A few genera have been established or resurrected since 2004. These are marked with a plus sign (+). Other genera have been synonymised. These are marked with a minus sign (-). The remaining genera in the list are mostly of historical interest only and are from a source that includes such genera without explanation. Few of these are recognized in modern treatments of the family.\nKew Gardens provides a list of genera that includes additional information. A list at the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website is frequently updated. \"Plants of the World Online\" currently accepts 224 genera.\nRecent changes.\nThe circumscription of several genera has changed since 2004. \"Tsoongia\", \"Paravitex\", and \"Viticipremna\" have been sunk into synonymy with \"Vitex\". \"Huxleya\" has been sunk into \"Volkameria\". \"Kalaharia\", \"Volkameria\", \"Ovieda\", and \"Tetraclea\" have been segregated from a formerly polyphyletic \"Clerodendrum\". \"Rydingia\" has been separated from \"Leucas\". The remaining \"Leucas\" is paraphyletic over four other genera.\nSubfamilies and tribes.\nIn 2004, the Lamiaceae were divided into seven subfamilies, plus 10 genera not placed in any of the subfamilies. The unplaced genera are: \"Tectona\", \"Callicarpa\", \"Hymenopyramis\", \"Petraeovitex\", \"Peronema\", \"Garrettia\", \"Cymaria\", \"Acrymia\", \"Holocheila\", and \"Ombrocharis\". The subfamilies are the Symphorematoideae, Viticoideae, Ajugoideae, Prostantheroideae, Nepetoideae, Scutellarioideae, and Lamioideae. The subfamily Viticoideae is probably not monophyletic. The Prostantheroideae and Nepetoideae are divided into tribes. These are shown in the phylogenetic tree below.\nPhylogeny.\nMost of the genera of Lamiaceae have never been sampled for DNA for molecular phylogenetic studies. Most of those that have been are included in the following phylogenetic tree. The phylogeny depicted below is based on seven different sources.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17859", "revid": "1308517384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17859", "title": "Wide shot", "text": "Cinematic techniques\nIn photography, filmmaking and video production, a wide shot (sometimes referred to as a full shot or long shot) is a shot that typically shows the entire object or human figure and is usually intended to place it in some relation to its surroundings. These are typically shot now using wide-angle lenses (an approximately 25\u00a0mm lens in 35\u00a0mm photography and 10\u00a0mm lens in 16\u00a0mm photography). However, due to sheer distance, establishing shots and extremely wide shots can use almost any camera type.\nHistory.\nThis type of filmmaking was a result of filmmakers trying to retain the sense of the viewer watching a play in front of them, as opposed to just a series of pictures.\nThe wide shot has been used since films have been made as it is a very basic type of cinematography. In 1878, one of the first true motion pictures, \"Sallie Gardner at a Gallop\", was released. Even though this wouldn't be considered a film in the current motion picture industry, it was a huge step towards complete motion pictures. It is arguable that it is very basic but it still remains that it was displayed as a wide angle as both the rider and horse are fully visible in the frame.\nIn the 1880s, celluloid photographic film and motion picture cameras became available so more motion pictures could be created in the form of Kinetoscope or through projectors. These early films also maintained a wide angle layout as it was the best way to keep everything visible for the viewer. Once motion pictures became more available in the 1890s, there were public screenings of many different films only being around a minute long, or even less. These films again adhered to the wide shot style. One of the first competitive filming techniques came in the form of the close-up, as George Albert Smith incorporated them into his film \"Hove\". Though unconfirmed as the first usage of this method, it is one of the earliest recorded examples. Once the introduction of new framing techniques were introduced, more and more styles were developed and used for the benefits they could provide that wide shots couldn't.\nIn the early 1900s, motion pictures evolved from short, minute long, screenings to becoming full-length motion pictures. More and more cinematic techniques appeared, resulting in the wide shot being less commonly used. However, it still remained as it is almost irreplaceable in what it can achieve. When television entered the home in the 1960s, it was seen as a massive hit to the cinema industry and many saw it as the decline in cinema popularity. This in turn resulted in films having to stay ahead of television by incorporating superior quality than that of a television. This was done by adding color, but importantly it implemented the use of widescreen. This would allow a massive increase in space usable by the director, thus allowing an even wider shot for the viewer to witness more of any given shot.\nModern films will now frequently use the different types of wide shots as they are a staple in filmmaking and are almost impossible to avoid unless deliberately chosen to. In the current climate of films, the technical quality of any given shot will appear with much better clarity which has given life to some incredible shots from modern cinema. Also, given the quality of modern home entertainment mediums such as Blu-ray, 3D and Ultra HD Blu Rays, this has allowed the scope and size of any given frame to encompass more of the scene and environment in greater detail.\nTypes.\nThere are a variety of ways of framing that are considered as being wide shots; these include:\nNotable examples.\nMany directors are known for their use of the variety of wide shots. A key example of them is the frequent use of establishing shots and very wide shots in Peter Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" trilogy, showing the vast New Zealand landscape to instil awe in the audience.\nIn the 1993 film \"Schindler's List\", there is a running image of a small girl trapped within a concentration camp wearing a red coat (the only colour in the film). She is frequently pictured in a wide shot format as a way to display both her and the horrific surroundings to build a disturbing contrast.\nIn the 1939 film \"The Wizard of Oz\", a very wide shot is used that keeps all the protagonists on screen with the Wizard's palace in clear view. \"The Wizard of Oz\" was also one of the first mainstream motion pictures to include colour.\nThe 1962 \"Lawrence of Arabia\" contains an enormous number of extreme wide shots which successfully induced the feeling of scale of the lead in his surrounding and aesthetically dwarfed him due to his surroundings making him seem more vulnerable and weak.\nThe 1981 film \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\" contains the use of a wide shot to show the dangerous scale of a boulder that is chasing the protagonist.\nThe 2008 film \"The Dark Knight\" featured a practical stunt in which a large truck and trailer are flipped nose first. This is shot very far back to give the shot more clarity and to see the flip through its entirety as opposed to cutting midway through.\nIn the 2015 Ridley Scott film \"The Martian\", the protagonist Mark Watney is stranded on Mars and the film contains many wide shots. These are used to show the Martian landscape and give the character the sense of isolation that the film would want.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17860", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17860", "title": "Logarithm", "text": "Mathematical function, inverse of an exponential function\n\\\\[1ex]\\scriptstyle\\frac{\\scriptstyle\\text{numerator}}{\\scriptstyle\\text{denominator}}\\end{matrix}\\right\\}\\,=\\,&lt;/math&gt;\nIn mathematics, the logarithm of a number is the exponent by which another fixed value, the base, must be raised to produce that number. For example, the logarithm of 1000 to base 10 is 3, because 1000 is 10 to the 3rd power: 1000 \n 103 \n 10\u2009\u00d7\u200910\u2009\u00d7\u200910. More generally, if \"x\" \n \"b\"\"y\", then y is the logarithm of x to base b, written log\"b\" \"x\", so log10 1000 \n 3. As a single-variable function, the logarithm to base b is the inverse of exponentiation with base b.\nThe logarithm base 10 is called the \"decimal\" or \"common\" logarithm and is commonly used in science and engineering. The \"natural\" logarithm has the number\u00a0\"e\" \u2248 2.718 as its base; its use is widespread in mathematics and physics because of its very simple derivative. The \"binary\" logarithm uses base 2 and is widely used in computer science, information theory, music theory, and photography. When the base is unambiguous from the context or irrelevant it is often omitted, and the logarithm is written log\u2009\"x\".\nLogarithms were introduced by John Napier in 1614 as a means of simplifying calculations. They were rapidly adopted by navigators, scientists, engineers, surveyors, and others to perform high-accuracy computations more easily. Using logarithm tables, tedious multi-digit multiplication steps can be replaced by table look-ups and simpler addition. This is possible because the logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms of the factors:\nformula_8\nprovided that b, x and y are all positive and \"b\" \u2260 1. The slide rule, also based on logarithms, allows quick calculations without tables, but at lower precision. The present-day notion of logarithms comes from Leonhard Euler, who connected them to the exponential function in the 18th century, and who also introduced the letter e as the base of natural logarithms.\nLogarithmic scales reduce wide-ranging quantities to smaller scopes. For example, the decibel (dB) is a unit used to express ratio as logarithms, mostly for signal power and amplitude (of which sound pressure is a common example). In chemistry, pH is a logarithmic measure for the acidity of an aqueous solution. Logarithms are commonplace in scientific formulae, and in measurements of the complexity of algorithms and of geometric objects called fractals. They help to describe frequency ratios of musical intervals, appear in formulas counting prime numbers or approximating factorials, inform some models in psychophysics, and can aid in forensic accounting.\nThe concept of logarithm as the inverse of exponentiation extends to other mathematical structures as well. However, in general settings, the logarithm tends to be a multi-valued function. For example, the complex logarithm is the multi-valued inverse of the complex exponential function. Similarly, the discrete logarithm is the multi-valued inverse of the exponential function in finite groups; it has uses in public-key cryptography.\nMotivation.\nAddition, multiplication, and exponentiation are three of the most fundamental arithmetic operations. The inverse of addition is subtraction, and the inverse of multiplication is division. Similarly, a logarithm is the inverse operation of exponentiation. Exponentiation is when a number b, the \"base\", is raised to a certain power y, the \"exponent\", to give a value x; this is denoted\nformula_9\nFor example, raising 2 to the power of 3 gives 8: formula_10\nThe logarithm of base b is the inverse operation, that provides the output y from the input x. That is, formula_11 is equivalent to formula_12 if b is a positive real number. (If b is not a positive real number, both exponentiation and logarithm can be defined but may take several values, which makes definitions much more complicated.)\nOne of the main historical motivations of introducing logarithms is the formula \nformula_13\nby which tables of logarithms allow multiplication and division to be reduced to addition and subtraction, a great aid to calculations before the invention of computers.\nDefinition.\nGiven a positive real number b such that \"b\" \u2260 1, the \"logarithm\" of a positive real number x with respect to base\u00a0b is the exponent by which b must be raised to yield x. In other words, the logarithm of x to base\u00a0b is the unique real number\u00a0y such that formula_14.\nThe logarithm is denoted \"log\"b\"\u2009\"x\"\" (pronounced as \"the logarithm of x to base\u00a0b\", \"the logarithm of x\", or most commonly \"the log, base\u00a0b, of x\").\nAn equivalent and more succinct definition is that the function log\"b\" is the inverse function to the function formula_15.\nLogarithmic identities.\nSeveral important formulas, sometimes called \"logarithmic identities\" or \"logarithmic laws\", relate logarithms to one another.\nProduct, quotient, power, and root.\nThe logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms of the numbers being multiplied; the logarithm of the ratio of two numbers is the difference of the logarithms. The logarithm of the p-th power of a number is p\u00a0times the logarithm of the number itself; the logarithm of a p-th root is the logarithm of the number divided by p. The following table lists these identities with examples. Each of the identities can be derived after substitution of the logarithm definitions formula_18 or formula_19 in the left hand sides. In the following formulas, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are positive real numbers and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is an integer greater than 1.\nChange of base.\nThe logarithm log\"b\"\u2009\"x\" can be computed from the logarithms of x and b with respect to an arbitrary base\u00a0k using the following formula:\nformula_20\nTypical scientific calculators calculate the logarithms to bases 10 and e. Logarithms with respect to any base\u00a0b can be determined using either of these two logarithms by the previous formula:\nformula_21\nGiven a number x and its logarithm \"y\" = log\"b\"\u2009\"x\" to an unknown base\u00a0b, the base is given by:\nformula_22\nwhich can be seen from taking the defining equation formula_23 to the power of formula_24\nParticular bases.\nAmong all choices for the base, three are particularly common. These are \"b\" \n 10, \"b\" \n \"e\" (the irrational mathematical constant and \"b\" \n 2 (the binary logarithm). In mathematical analysis, the logarithm base e is widespread because of analytical properties explained below. On the other hand, base 10 logarithms (the common logarithm) are easy to use for manual calculations in the decimal number system:\nformula_25\nThus, log10\u2009(\"x\") is related to the number of decimal digits of a positive integer x: The number of digits is the smallest integer strictly bigger than \nFor example, log10(5986) is approximately 3.78\u00a0. The next integer above it is 4, which is the number of digits of 5986. Both the natural logarithm and the binary logarithm are used in information theory, corresponding to the use of nats or bits as the fundamental units of information, respectively.\nBinary logarithms are also used in computer science, where the binary system is ubiquitous; in music theory, where a pitch ratio of two (the octave) is ubiquitous and the number of cents between any two pitches is a scaled version of the binary logarithm, or log\u00a02 times 1200, of the pitch ratio (that is, 100\u00a0cents per semitone in conventional equal temperament), or equivalently the log base and in photography rescaled base\u00a02 logarithms are used to measure exposure values, light levels, exposure times, lens apertures, and film speeds in \"stops\".\nThe abbreviation log\u2009\"x\" is often used when the intended base can be inferred based on the context or discipline, or when the base is indeterminate or immaterial. Common logarithms (base 10), historically used in logarithm tables and slide rules, are a basic tool for measurement and computation in many areas of science and engineering; in these contexts log\u2009\"x\" still often means the base ten logarithm. In mathematics log\u2009\"x\" usually refers to the natural logarithm (base e).\nIn computer science and information theory, log often refers to binary logarithms (base 2). The following table lists common notations for logarithms to these bases. The \"ISO notation\" column lists designations suggested by the International Organization for Standardization.\nHistory.\nThe history of logarithms in seventeenth-century Europe saw the discovery of a new function that extended the realm of analysis beyond the scope of algebraic methods. The method of logarithms was publicly propounded by John Napier in 1614, in a book titled \"Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio\" (\"Description of the Wonderful Canon of Logarithms\"). Prior to Napier's invention, there had been other techniques of similar scopes, such as the prosthaphaeresis or the use of tables of progressions, extensively developed by Jost B\u00fcrgi around 1600. Napier coined the term for logarithm in Middle Latin, , literally meaning 'ratio-number', derived from the Greek 'proportion, ratio, word' + 'number'.\nThe common logarithm of a number is the index of that power of ten which equals the number. Speaking of a number as requiring so many figures is a rough allusion to common logarithm, and was referred to by Archimedes as the \"order of a number\". The first real logarithms were heuristic methods to turn multiplication into addition, thus facilitating rapid computation. Some of these methods used tables derived from trigonometric identities. Such methods are called prosthaphaeresis.\nInvention of the function now known as the natural logarithm began as an attempt to perform a quadrature of a rectangular hyperbola by Gr\u00e9goire de Saint-Vincent, a Belgian Jesuit residing in Prague. Archimedes had written \"The Quadrature of the Parabola\" in the third century BC, but a quadrature for the hyperbola eluded all efforts until Saint-Vincent published his results in 1647. The relation that the logarithm provides between a geometric progression in its argument and an arithmetic progression of values, prompted A. A. de Sarasa to make the connection of Saint-Vincent's quadrature and the tradition of logarithms in prosthaphaeresis, leading to the term \"hyperbolic logarithm\", a synonym for natural logarithm. Soon the new function was appreciated by Christiaan Huygens, and James Gregory. The notation Log \"y\" was adopted by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in 1675, and the next year he connected it to the integral formula_26\nBefore Euler developed his modern conception of complex natural logarithms, Roger Cotes had a nearly equivalent result when he showed in 1714 that\nformula_27\nLogarithm tables, slide rules, and historical applications.\nBy simplifying difficult calculations before calculators and computers became available, logarithms contributed to the advance of science, especially astronomy. They were critical to advances in surveying, celestial navigation, and other domains. Pierre-Simon Laplace called logarithms\n... [a]n admirable artifice which, by reducing to a few days the labour of many months, doubles the life of the astronomer, and spares him the errors and disgust inseparable from long calculations.\nAs the function \"f\"(\"x\") \n b\"x\" is the inverse function of log\"b\"\u2009\"x\", it has been called an antilogarithm. Nowadays, this function is more commonly called an exponential function.\nLog tables.\nA key tool that enabled the practical use of logarithms was the \"table of logarithms\". The first such table was compiled by Henry Briggs in 1617, immediately after Napier's invention but with the innovation of using 10 as the base. Briggs' first table contained the common logarithms of all integers in the range from 1 to 1000, with a precision of 14\u00a0digits. Subsequently, tables with increasing scope were written. These tables listed the values of log10\u2009\"x\" for any number\u00a0x in a certain range, at a certain precision. Base-10 logarithms were universally used for computation, hence the name common logarithm, since numbers that differ by factors of 10 have logarithms that differ by integers. The common logarithm of x can be separated into an integer part and a fractional part, known as the characteristic and mantissa. Tables of logarithms need only include the mantissa, as the characteristic can be easily determined by counting digits from the decimal point. The characteristic of is one plus the characteristic of x, and their mantissas are the same. Thus using a three-digit log table, the logarithm of 3542 is approximated by\nformula_28\nGreater accuracy can be obtained by interpolation:\nformula_29\nThe value of 10\"x\" can be determined by reverse look up in the same table, since the logarithm is a monotonic function.\nComputations.\nThe product and quotient of two positive numbers c and \"d\" were routinely calculated as the sum and difference of their logarithms. The product\u00a0\"cd\" or quotient\u00a0\"c\"/\"d\" came from looking up the antilogarithm of the sum or difference, via the same table:\nformula_30\nand\nformula_31\nFor manual calculations that demand any appreciable precision, performing the lookups of the two logarithms, calculating their sum or difference, and looking up the antilogarithm is much faster than performing the multiplication by earlier methods such as prosthaphaeresis, which relies on trigonometric identities.\nCalculations of powers and roots are reduced to multiplications or divisions and lookups by\nformula_32\nand\nformula_33\nTrigonometric calculations were facilitated by tables that contained the common logarithms of trigonometric functions.\nSlide rules.\nAnother critical application was the slide rule, a pair of logarithmically divided scales used for calculation. The non-sliding logarithmic scale, Gunter's rule, was invented shortly after Napier's invention. William Oughtred enhanced it to create the slide rule\u2014a pair of logarithmic scales movable with respect to each other. Numbers are placed on sliding scales at distances proportional to the differences between their logarithms. Sliding the upper scale appropriately amounts to mechanically adding logarithms, as illustrated here:\nFor example, adding the distance from 1 to 2 on the lower scale to the distance from 1 to 3 on the upper scale yields a product of 6, which is read off at the lower part. The slide rule was an essential calculating tool for engineers and scientists until the 1970s, because it allows, at the expense of precision, much faster computation than techniques based on tables.\nAnalytic properties.\nA deeper study of logarithms requires the concept of a \"function\". A function is a rule that, given one number, produces another number. An example is the function producing the x-th power of b from any real number\u00a0x, where the base\u00a0b is a fixed number. This function is written as \"f\"(\"x\") = b\u2009\"x\". When b is positive and unequal to 1, we show below that f is invertible when considered as a function from the reals to the positive reals.\nExistence.\nLet b be a positive real number not equal to 1 and let \"f\"(\"x\") = b\u2009\"x\".\nIt is a standard result in real analysis that any continuous strictly monotonic function is bijective between its domain and range. This fact follows from the intermediate value theorem. Now, f is strictly increasing (for \"b\" &gt; 1), or strictly decreasing (for ), is continuous, has domain formula_34, and has range formula_35. Therefore, f is a bijection from formula_34 to formula_37. In other words, for each positive real number y, there is exactly one real number x such that formula_38.\nWe let formula_39 denote the inverse of f. That is, log\"b\"\u2009\"y\" is the unique real number x such that formula_38. This function is called the base-b \"logarithm function\" or \"logarithmic function\" (or just \"logarithm\").\nCharacterization by the product formula.\nThe function log\"b\"\u2009\"x\" can also be essentially characterized by the product formula\nformula_41\nMore precisely, the logarithm to any base \"b\" &gt; 1 is the only increasing function \"f\" from the positive reals to the reals satisfying \"f\"(\"b\") = 1 and\nformula_42\nGraph of the logarithm function.\nAs discussed above, the function log\"b\" is the inverse to the exponential function formula_15. Therefore, their graphs correspond to each other upon exchanging the x- and the y-coordinates (or upon reflection at the diagonal line \"x\" = \"y\"), as shown at the right: a point (\"t\", \"u\" = b\"t\") on the graph of f yields a point (\"u\", \"t\" = log\"b\"\u2009\"u\") on the graph of the logarithm and vice versa. As a consequence, log\"b\"\u2009(\"x\") diverges to infinity (gets bigger than any given number) if x grows to infinity, provided that b is greater than one. In that case, log\"b\"(\"x\") is an increasing function. For \"b\" &lt; 1, log\"b\"\u2009(\"x\") tends to minus infinity instead. When x approaches zero, log\"b\"\u2009\"x\" goes to minus infinity for \"b\" &gt; 1 (plus infinity for \"b\" &lt; 1, respectively).\nDerivative and antiderivative.\nAnalytic properties of functions pass to their inverses. Thus, as \"f\"(\"x\") = b\"x\" is a continuous and differentiable function, so is log\"b\"\u2009\"y\". Roughly, a continuous function is differentiable if its graph has no sharp \"corners\". Moreover, as the derivative of \"f\"(\"x\") evaluates to ln(\"b\") \"b\"\"x\" by the properties of the exponential function, the chain rule implies that the derivative of log\"b\"\u2009\"x\" is given by\nformula_44\nThat is, the slope of the tangent touching the graph of the base-\"b\" logarithm at the point (\"x\", log\"b\"\u2009(\"x\")) equals 1/(\"x\"\u2009ln(\"b\")).\nThe derivative of ln(\"x\") is 1/\"x\"; this implies that ln(\"x\") is the unique antiderivative of 1/\"x\" that has the value 0 for \"x\" = 1. It is this very simple formula that motivated to qualify as \"natural\" the natural logarithm; this is also one of the main reasons of the importance of the constant\u00a0e.\nThe derivative with a generalized functional argument \"f\"(\"x\") is\nformula_45\nThe quotient at the right hand side is called the logarithmic derivative of \"f\". Computing \"f'\"(\"x\") by means of the derivative of ln(\"f\"(\"x\")) is known as logarithmic differentiation. The antiderivative of the natural logarithm ln(\"x\") is:\nformula_46\nRelated formulas, such as antiderivatives of logarithms to other bases can be derived from this equation using the change of bases.\nIntegral representation of the natural logarithm.\nThe natural logarithm of t can be defined as the definite integral:\nformula_47\nThis definition has the advantage that it does not rely on the exponential function or any trigonometric functions; the definition is in terms of an integral of a simple reciprocal. As an integral, ln(\"t\") equals the area between the x-axis and the graph of the function 1/\"x\", ranging from \"x\" = 1 to \"x\" = \"t\". This is a consequence of the fundamental theorem of calculus and the fact that the derivative of ln(\"x\") is 1/\"x\". Product and power logarithm formulas can be derived from this definition. For example, the product formula ln(\"tu\") = ln(\"t\") + ln(\"u\") is deduced as:\nformula_48\nThe equality\u00a0(1) splits the integral into two parts, while the equality\u00a0(2) is a change of variable (\"w\" = x/\"t\"). In the illustration below, the splitting corresponds to dividing the area into the yellow and blue parts. Rescaling the left hand blue area vertically by the factor\u00a0t and shrinking it by the same factor horizontally does not change its size. Moving it appropriately, the area fits the graph of the function \"f\"(\"x\") = 1/\"x\" again. Therefore, the left hand blue area, which is the integral of \"f\"(\"x\") from t to tu is the same as the integral from 1 to u. This justifies the equality\u00a0(2) with a more geometric proof.\nThe power formula ln(\"t\"\"r\") = \"r\" ln(\"t\") may be derived in a similar way:\nformula_49\nThe second equality uses a change of variables (integration by substitution), \"w\" = x1/\"r\".\nThe sum over the reciprocals of natural numbers,\nformula_50\nis called the harmonic series. It is closely tied to the natural logarithm: as n tends to infinity, the difference,\nformula_51\nconverges (i.e. gets arbitrarily close) to a number known as the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant \"\u03b3\" = 0.5772... This relation aids in analyzing the performance of algorithms such as quicksort.\nTranscendence of the logarithm.\nReal numbers that are not algebraic are called transcendental; for example, \u03c0 and \"e\" are such numbers, but formula_52 is not. Almost all real numbers are transcendental. The logarithm is an example of a transcendental function. The Gelfond\u2013Schneider theorem asserts that logarithms usually take transcendental, i.e. \"difficult\" values.\nCalculation.\nLogarithms are easy to compute in some cases, such as log10\u2009(1000) = 3. In general, logarithms can be calculated using power series or the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean, or be retrieved from a precalculated logarithm table that provides a fixed precision. Newton's method, an iterative method to solve equations approximately, can also be used to calculate the logarithm, because its inverse function, the exponential function, can be computed efficiently. Using look-up tables, CORDIC-like methods can be used to compute logarithms by using only the operations of addition and bit shifts. Moreover, the binary logarithm algorithm calculates lb(\"x\") recursively, based on repeated squarings of x, taking advantage of the relation\nformula_53\nPower series.\nTaylor series.\nFor any real number z that satisfies 0 &lt; \"z\" \u2264 2, the following formula holds:\nformula_54\nEquating the function ln(\"z\") to this infinite sum (series) is shorthand for saying that the function can be approximated to a more and more accurate value by the following expressions (known as partial sums):\nformula_55\nFor example, with \"z\" \n 1.5 the third approximation yields 0.4167, which is about 0.011 greater than ln(1.5) \n 0.405465, and the ninth approximation yields 0.40553, which is only about 0.0001 greater. The nth partial sum can approximate ln(\"z\") with arbitrary precision, provided the number of summands n is large enough.\nIn elementary calculus, the series is said to converge to the function ln(\"z\"), and the function is the limit of the series. It is the Taylor series of the natural logarithm at \"z\" = 1. The Taylor series of ln(\"z\") provides a particularly useful approximation to ln(1 + \"z\") when z is small, |\"z\"| &lt; 1, since then\nformula_56\nFor example, with \"z\" = 0.1 the first-order approximation gives ln(1.1) \u2248 0.1, which is less than 5% off the correct value 0.0953.\nInverse hyperbolic tangent.\nAnother series is based on the inverse hyperbolic tangent function:\nformula_57\nfor any real number \"z\" &gt; 0. Using sigma notation, this is also written as\nformula_58\nThis series can be derived from the above Taylor series. It converges quicker than the Taylor series, especially if z is close to 1. For example, for \"z\" = 1.5, the first three terms of the second series approximate ln(1.5) with an error of about . The quick convergence for z close to 1 can be taken advantage of in the following way: given a low-accuracy approximation \"y\" \u2248 ln(\"z\") and putting\nformula_59\nthe logarithm of z is:\nformula_60\nThe better the initial approximation y is, the closer A is to 1, so its logarithm can be calculated efficiently. A can be calculated using the exponential series, which converges quickly provided y is not too large. Calculating the logarithm of larger z can be reduced to smaller values of z by writing \"z\" \n \"a\" \u00b7 10\"b\", so that ln(\"z\") \n ln(\"a\") + b \u00b7 ln(10).\nA closely related method can be used to compute the logarithm of integers. Putting formula_61 in the above series, it follows that:\nformula_62\nIf the logarithm of a large integer\u00a0n is known, then this series yields a fast converging series for log(\"n\"+1), with a rate of convergence of formula_63.\nArithmetic\u2013geometric mean approximation.\nThe arithmetic\u2013geometric mean yields high-precision approximations of the natural logarithm. Sasaki and Kanada showed in 1982 that it was particularly fast for precisions between 400 and 1000 decimal places, while Taylor series methods were typically faster when less precision was needed. In their work ln(\"x\") is approximated to a precision of 2\u2212\"p\" (or p\u00a0precise bits) by the following formula (due to Carl Friedrich Gauss):\nformula_64\nHere M(\"x\", \"y\") denotes the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean of x and y. It is obtained by repeatedly calculating the average (\"x\" + \"y\")/2 (arithmetic mean) and formula_65 (geometric mean) of x and y then let those two numbers become the next x and y. The two numbers quickly converge to a common limit which is the value of M(\"x\", \"y\"). m is chosen such that\nformula_66\nto ensure the required precision. A larger m makes the M(\"x\", \"y\") calculation take more steps (the initial x and y are farther apart so it takes more steps to converge) but gives more precision. The constants and ln(2) can be calculated with quickly converging series.\nFeynman's algorithm.\nWhile at Los Alamos National Laboratory working on the Manhattan Project, Richard Feynman developed a bit-processing algorithm to compute the logarithm that is similar to long division and was later used in the Connection Machine. The algorithm relies on the fact that every real number x where 1 &lt; \"x\" &lt; 2 can be represented as a product of distinct factors of the form 1 + 2\u2212\"k\". The algorithm sequentially builds that product\u00a0P, starting with \"P\" \n 1 and \"k\" \n 1: if \"P\" \u00b7 (1 + 2\u2212\"k\") &lt; \"x\", then it changes P to \"P\" \u00b7 (1 + 2\u2212\"k\"). It then increases formula_67 by one regardless. The algorithm stops when k is large enough to give the desired accuracy. Because log(\"x\") is the sum of the terms of the form log(1 + 2\u2212\"k\") corresponding to those k for which the factor 1 + 2\u2212\"k\" was included in the product\u00a0P, log(\"x\") may be computed by simple addition, using a table of log(1 + 2\u2212\"k\") for all k. Any base may be used for the logarithm table.\nApplications.\nLogarithms have many applications inside and outside mathematics. Some of these occurrences are related to the notion of scale invariance. For example, each chamber of the shell of a nautilus is an approximate copy of the next one, scaled by a constant factor. This gives rise to a logarithmic spiral. Benford's law on the distribution of leading digits can also be explained by scale invariance. Logarithms are also linked to self-similarity. For example, logarithms appear in the analysis of algorithms that solve a problem by dividing it into two similar smaller problems and patching their solutions. The dimensions of self-similar geometric shapes, that is, shapes whose parts resemble the overall picture are also based on logarithms. Logarithmic scales are useful for quantifying the relative change of a value as opposed to its absolute difference. Moreover, because the logarithmic function log(\"x\") grows very slowly for large x, logarithmic scales are used to compress large-scale scientific data. Logarithms also occur in numerous scientific formulas, such as the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation, the Fenske equation, or the Nernst equation.\nLogarithmic scale.\nScientific quantities are often expressed as logarithms of other quantities, using a \"logarithmic scale\". For example, the decibel is a unit of measurement associated with logarithmic-scale quantities. It is based on the common logarithm of ratios\u201410\u00a0times the common logarithm of a power ratio or 20\u00a0times the common logarithm of a voltage ratio. It is used to quantify the attenuation or amplification of electrical signals, to describe power levels of sounds in acoustics, and the absorbance of light in the fields of spectrometry and optics. The signal-to-noise ratio describing the amount of unwanted noise in relation to a (meaningful) signal is also measured in decibels. In a similar vein, the peak signal-to-noise ratio is commonly used to assess the quality of sound and image compression methods using the logarithm.\nThe strength of an earthquake is measured by taking the common logarithm of the energy emitted at the quake. This is used in the moment magnitude scale or the Richter magnitude scale. For example, a 5.0 earthquake releases 32\u00a0times (101.5) and a 6.0 releases 1000\u00a0times (103) the energy of a 4.0. Apparent magnitude measures the brightness of stars logarithmically. In chemistry the negative of the decimal logarithm, the decimal &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;cologarithm, is indicated by the letter p. For instance, pH is the decimal cologarithm of the activity of hydronium ions (the form hydrogen ions \u200aH+ take in water). The activity of hydronium ions in neutral water is 10\u22127\u00a0mol\u00b7L\u22121, hence a pH of 7. Vinegar typically has a pH of about 3. The difference of 4 corresponds to a ratio of 104 of the activity, that is, vinegar's hydronium ion activity is about 10\u22123 mol\u00b7L\u22121.\nSemilog (log\u2013linear) graphs use the logarithmic scale concept for visualization: one axis, typically the vertical one, is scaled logarithmically. For example, the chart at the right compresses the steep increase from 1\u00a0million to 1\u00a0trillion to the same space (on the vertical axis) as the increase from 1 to 1\u00a0million. In such graphs, exponential functions of the form \"f\"(\"x\") = \"a\" \u00b7 \"b\"\"x\" appear as straight lines with slope equal to the logarithm of b. Log-log graphs scale both axes logarithmically, which causes functions of the form \"f\"(\"x\") = \"a\" \u00b7 \"x\"\"k\" to be depicted as straight lines with slope equal to the exponent\u00a0k. This is applied in visualizing and analyzing power laws.\nPsychology.\nLogarithms occur in several laws describing human perception: Hick's law proposes a logarithmic relation between the time individuals take to choose an alternative and the number of choices they have. Fitts's law predicts that the time required to rapidly move to a target area is a logarithmic function of the ratio between the distance to a target and the size of the target. In psychophysics, the Weber\u2013Fechner law proposes a logarithmic relationship between stimulus and sensation such as the actual vs. the perceived weight of an item a person is carrying. (This \"law\", however, is less realistic than more recent models, such as Stevens's power law.)\nPsychological studies found that individuals with little mathematics education tend to estimate quantities logarithmically, that is, they position a number on an unmarked line according to its logarithm, so that 10 is positioned as close to 100 as 100 is to 1000. Increasing education shifts this to a linear estimate (positioning 1000 10 times as far away) in some circumstances, while logarithms are used when the numbers to be plotted are difficult to plot linearly.\nProbability theory and statistics.\nLogarithms arise in probability theory: the law of large numbers dictates that, for a fair coin, as the number of coin-tosses increases to infinity, the observed proportion of heads approaches one-half. The fluctuations of this proportion about one-half are described by the law of the iterated logarithm.\nLogarithms also occur in log-normal distributions. When the logarithm of a random variable has a normal distribution, the variable is said to have a log-normal distribution. Log-normal distributions are encountered in many fields, wherever a variable is formed as the product of many independent positive random variables, for example in the study of turbulence.\nLogarithms are used for maximum-likelihood estimation of parametric statistical models. For such a model, the likelihood function depends on at least one parameter that must be estimated. A maximum of the likelihood function occurs at the same parameter-value as a maximum of the logarithm of the likelihood (the \"log\u00a0likelihood\"), because the logarithm is an increasing function. The log-likelihood is easier to maximize, especially for the multiplied likelihoods for independent random variables.\nBenford's law describes the occurrence of digits in many data sets, such as heights of buildings. According to Benford's law, the probability that the first decimal-digit of an item in the data sample is d (from 1 to 9) equals log10\u2009(\"d\" + 1) \u2212 log10\u2009(\"d\"), \"regardless\" of the unit of measurement. Thus, about 30% of the data can be expected to have 1 as first digit, 18% start with 2, etc. Auditors examine deviations from Benford's law to detect fraudulent accounting.\nThe logarithm transformation is a type of data transformation used to bring the empirical distribution closer to the assumed one.\nComputational complexity.\nAnalysis of algorithms is a branch of computer science that studies the performance of algorithms (computer programs solving a certain problem). Logarithms are valuable for describing algorithms that divide a problem into smaller ones, and join the solutions of the subproblems.\nFor example, to find a number in a sorted list, the binary search algorithm checks the middle entry and proceeds with the half before or after the middle entry if the number is still not found. This algorithm requires, on average, log2\u2009(\"N\") comparisons, where N is the list's length. Similarly, the merge sort algorithm sorts an unsorted list by dividing the list into halves and sorting these first before merging the results. Merge sort algorithms typically require a time approximately proportional to \"N\" \u00b7 log(\"N\"). The base of the logarithm is not specified here, because the result only changes by a constant factor when another base is used. A constant factor is usually disregarded in the analysis of algorithms under the standard uniform cost model.\nA function\u00a0\"f\"(\"x\") is said to grow logarithmically if \"f\"(\"x\") is (exactly or approximately) proportional to the logarithm of x. (Biological descriptions of organism growth, however, use this term for an exponential function.) For example, any natural number\u00a0N can be represented in binary form in no more than log2\u2009\"N\" + 1\u00a0bits. In other words, the amount of memory needed to store N grows logarithmically with N.\nEntropy and chaos.\nEntropy is broadly a measure of the disorder of some system. In statistical thermodynamics, the entropy\u00a0S of some physical system is defined as\nformula_68\nThe sum is over all possible states\u00a0i of the system in question, such as the positions of gas particles in a container. Moreover, \"p\"\"i\" is the probability that the state\u00a0i is attained and k is the Boltzmann constant. Similarly, entropy in information theory measures the quantity of information. If a message recipient may expect any one of N possible messages with equal likelihood, then the amount of information conveyed by any one such message is quantified as log2\u2009\"N\" bits.\nLyapunov exponents use logarithms to gauge the degree of chaoticity of a dynamical system. For example, for a particle moving on an oval billiard table, even small changes of the initial conditions result in very different paths of the particle. Such systems are chaotic in a deterministic way, because small measurement errors of the initial state predictably lead to largely different final states. At least one Lyapunov exponent of a deterministically chaotic system is positive.\nFractals.\nLogarithms occur in definitions of the dimension of fractals. Fractals are geometric objects that are self-similar in the sense that small parts reproduce, at least roughly, the entire global structure. The Sierpinski triangle (pictured) can be covered by three copies of itself, each having sides half the original length. This makes the Hausdorff dimension of this structure ln(3)/ln(2) \u2248 1.58. Another logarithm-based notion of dimension is obtained by counting the number of boxes needed to cover the fractal in question.\nMusic.\nLogarithms are related to musical tones and intervals. In equal temperament tunings, the frequency ratio depends only on the interval between two tones, not on the specific frequency, or pitch, of the individual tones. In the 12-tone equal temperament tuning common in modern Western music, each octave (doubling of frequency) is broken into twelve equally spaced intervals called semitones. For example, if the note\u00a0\"A\" has a frequency of 440\u00a0Hz then the note \"B-flat\" has a frequency of 466\u00a0Hz. The interval between \"A\" and \"B-flat\" is a semitone, as is the one between \"B-flat\" and \"B\" (frequency 493\u00a0Hz). Accordingly, the frequency ratios agree:\nformula_69\nIntervals between arbitrary pitches can be measured in octaves by taking the logarithm of the frequency ratio, can be measured in equally tempered semitones by taking the logarithm (12 times the logarithm), or can be measured in cents, hundredths of a semitone, by taking the logarithm (1200 times the logarithm). The latter is used for finer encoding, as it is needed for finer measurements or non-equal temperaments.\nNumber theory.\nNatural logarithms are closely linked to counting prime numbers (2, 3, 5, 7, 11, ...), an important topic in number theory. For any integer\u00a0x, the quantity of prime numbers less than or equal to x is denoted . The prime number theorem asserts that is approximately given by\nformula_70\nin the sense that the ratio of and that fraction approaches 1 when x tends to infinity. As a consequence, the probability that a randomly chosen number between 1 and x is prime is inversely proportional to the number of decimal digits of x. A far better estimate of is given by the offset logarithmic integral function Li(\"x\"), defined by\nformula_71\nThe Riemann hypothesis, one of the oldest open mathematical conjectures, can be stated in terms of comparing and Li(\"x\"). The Erd\u0151s\u2013Kac theorem describing the number of distinct prime factors also involves the natural logarithm.\nThe logarithm of \"n\" factorial, \"n\"! = 1 \u00b7 2 \u00b7 ... \u00b7 \"n\", is given by\nformula_72\nThis can be used to obtain Stirling's formula, an approximation of \"n\"! for large n.\nGeneralizations.\nComplex logarithm.\nAll the complex numbers a that solve the equation\nformula_73\nare called \"complex logarithms\" of z, when z is (considered as) a complex number. A complex number is commonly represented as \"z \n x + iy\", where x and y are real numbers and i is an imaginary unit, the square of which is \u22121. Such a number can be visualized by a point in the complex plane, as shown at the right. The polar form encodes a non-zero complex number\u00a0z by its absolute value, that is, the (positive, real) distance\u00a0r to the origin, and an angle between the real (x) axis\"\u00a0\"Re and the line passing through both the origin and z. This angle is called the argument of z.\nThe absolute value r of z is given by\nformula_74\nUsing the geometrical interpretation of sine and cosine and their periodicity in , any complex number\u00a0z may be denoted as\nformula_75\nfor any integer number\u00a0k. Evidently the argument of z is not uniquely specified: both \u03c6 and \"\u03c6\"' = \"\u03c6\" + 2\"k\"\u03c0 are valid arguments of z for all integers\u00a0k, because adding 2\"k\"\u03c0\u00a0radians or \"k\"\u22c5360\u00b0 to \u03c6 corresponds to \"winding\" around the origin counter-clock-wise by k\u00a0turns. The resulting complex number is always z, as illustrated at the right for \"k\" \n 1. One may select exactly one of the possible arguments of z as the so-called \"principal argument\", denoted Arg(\"z\"), with a capital\u00a0A, by requiring \u03c6 to belong to one, conveniently selected turn, e.g. or 0 \u2264 \"\u03c6\" &lt; 2\u03c0. These regions, where the argument of z is uniquely determined are called \"branches\" of the argument function.\nEuler's formula connects the trigonometric functions sine and cosine to the complex exponential:\nformula_76\nUsing this formula, and again the periodicity, the following identities hold:\nformula_77\nwhere ln(\"r\") is the unique real natural logarithm, \"a\"\"k\" denote the complex logarithms of z, and k is an arbitrary integer. Therefore, the complex logarithms of z, which are all those complex values \"a\"\"k\" for which the \"a\"\"k\"-th\u00a0power of e equals z, are the infinitely many values\nformula_78\nfor arbitrary integers k.\nTaking k such that \"\u03c6\" + 2\"k\"\u03c0 is within the defined interval for the principal arguments, then \"a\"\"k\" is called the \"principal value\" of the logarithm, denoted Log(\"z\"), again with a capital\u00a0L. The principal argument of any positive real number\u00a0x is 0; hence Log(\"x\") is a real number and equals the real (natural) logarithm. However, the above formulas for logarithms of products and powers do not generalize to the principal value of the complex logarithm.\nThe illustration at the right depicts Log(\"z\"), confining the arguments of z to the interval (\u2212\u03c0, \u03c0]. This way the corresponding branch of the complex logarithm has discontinuities all along the negative real x\u00a0axis, which can be seen in the jump in the hue there. This discontinuity arises from jumping to the other boundary in the same branch, when crossing a boundary, i.e. not changing to the corresponding k-value of the continuously neighboring branch. Such a locus is called a branch cut. Dropping the range restrictions on the argument makes the relations \"argument of z\", and consequently the \"logarithm of z\", multi-valued functions.\nInverses of other exponential functions.\nExponentiation occurs in many areas of mathematics and its inverse function is often referred to as the logarithm. For example, the logarithm of a matrix is the (multi-valued) inverse function of the matrix exponential. Another example is the \"p\"-adic logarithm, the inverse function of the \"p\"-adic exponential. Both are defined via Taylor series analogous to the real case. In the context of differential geometry, the exponential map maps the tangent space at a point of a manifold to a neighborhood of that point. Its inverse is also called the logarithmic (or log) map.\nIn the context of finite groups exponentiation is given by repeatedly multiplying one group element\u00a0b with itself. The discrete logarithm is the integer\u00a0\"n\" solving the equation\nformula_79\nwhere x is an element of the group. Carrying out the exponentiation can be done efficiently, but the discrete logarithm is believed to be very hard to calculate in some groups. This asymmetry has important applications in public key cryptography, such as for example in the Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange, a routine that allows secure exchanges of cryptographic keys over unsecured information channels. Zech's logarithm is related to the discrete logarithm in the multiplicative group of non-zero elements of a finite field.\nFurther logarithm-like inverse functions include the \"double logarithm\"\u00a0ln(ln(\"x\")), the \"super- or hyper-4-logarithm\" (a slight variation of which is called iterated logarithm in computer science), the Lambert W function, and the logit. They are the inverse functions of the double exponential function, tetration, of \"f\"(\"w\") \n \"wew\", and of the logistic function, respectively.\nRelated concepts.\nFrom the perspective of group theory, the identity log(\"cd\") \n log(\"c\") + log(\"d\") expresses a group isomorphism between positive reals under multiplication and reals under addition. Logarithmic functions are the only continuous isomorphisms between these groups. By means of that isomorphism, the Haar measure (Lebesgue measure)\u00a0\"dx\" on the reals corresponds to the Haar measure\u00a0\"dx\"/\"x\" on the positive reals. The non-negative reals not only have a multiplication, but also have addition, and form a semiring, called the probability semiring; this is in fact a semifield. The logarithm then takes multiplication to addition (log multiplication), and takes addition to log addition (LogSumExp), giving an isomorphism of semirings between the probability semiring and the log semiring.\nLogarithmic one-forms\u00a0\"df\"/\"f\" appear in complex analysis and algebraic geometry as differential forms with logarithmic poles.\nThe polylogarithm is the function defined by\nformula_80\nIt is related to the natural logarithm by Li1\u2009(\"z\") = \u2212ln(1 \u2212 \"z\"). Moreover, Li\"s\"\u2009(1) equals the Riemann zeta function \u03b6(\"s\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17862", "revid": "43059617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17862", "title": "L. Ron Hubbard", "text": "American writer and Scientology founder (1911\u20131986)\nLafayette Ronald Hubbard (March 13, 1911\u00a0\u2013 January 24, 1986) was an American author and the founder of Scientology. A prolific writer of pulp science fiction and fantasy novels in his early career, in 1950 he authored the pseudoscientific book \"\" and established organizations to promote and practice Dianetics techniques. Hubbard created Scientology in 1952 after losing the intellectual rights to his literature on Dianetics in bankruptcy. He would lead the Church of Scientology\u00a0\u2013 variously described as a cult, a new religious movement, or a business\u00a0\u2013 until his death in 1986.\nBorn in Tilden, Nebraska, in 1911, Hubbard spent much of his childhood in Helena, Montana. While his father was posted to the U.S. naval base on Guam in the late 1920s, Hubbard traveled to Asia and the South Pacific. In 1930, Hubbard enrolled at George Washington University to study civil engineering but dropped out in his second year. He began his career as an author of pulp fiction and married Margaret Grubb, who shared his interest in aviation.\nHubbard was an officer in the Navy during World War II, where he briefly commanded two ships but was removed from command both times. The last few months of his active service were spent in a hospital, being treated for a variety of complaints. After the war, he sought psychiatric help from a veteran's charity hospital in Georgia. While acting as a lay analyst, or peer counselor, in Georgia, Hubbard began writing what would become Dianetics. In 1951, Hubbard's wife Sara said that experts had diagnosed him with paranoid schizophrenia and recommended lifelong hospitalization. In 1953, the first Scientology organizations were founded by Hubbard. In 1954, a Scientology church in Los Angeles was founded, which became the Church of Scientology International. Hubbard added organizational management strategies, principles of pedagogy, a theory of communication and prevention strategies for healthy living to the teachings of Scientology. As Scientology came under increasing media attention and legal pressure in a number of countries during the late 1960s and early 1970s, Hubbard spent much of his time at sea as \"commodore\" of the Sea Organization, a private, quasi-paramilitary Scientologist fleet.\nHubbard returned to the United States in 1975 and went into seclusion in the California desert after an unsuccessful attempt to take over the town of Clearwater, Florida. In 1978, Hubbard was convicted of fraud \"in absentia\" by France. In the same year, 11 high-ranking members of Scientology were indicted on 28 charges for their role in the Church's Snow White Program, a systematic program of espionage against the United States government. One of the indicted was Hubbard's wife Mary Sue Hubbard; he himself was named an unindicted co-conspirator. Hubbard spent the remaining years of his life in seclusion, attended to by a small group of Scientology officials.\nFollowing his 1986 death, Scientology leaders announced that Hubbard's body had become an impediment to his work and that he had decided to \"drop his body\" to continue his research on another plane of existence. The Church of Scientology describes Hubbard in hagiographic terms, though many of his autobiographical statements were fictitious. Sociologist Stephen Kent has observed that Hubbard \"likely presented a personality disorder known as malignant narcissism.\"\nLife.\nBefore Dianetics.\nLafayette Ronald Hubbard was born on March 13, 1911, the only child of Ledora May Waterbury, who had trained as a teacher, and Harry Ross Hubbard, a low-ranking United States Navy officer. Like many military families of the era, the Hubbards repeatedly relocated around the United States and overseas. After moving to Kalispell, Montana, they settled in Helena in 1913. Hubbard's father rejoined the Navy in April 1917, during World War I, while his mother worked as a clerk for the state government. After his father was posted to Guam, Hubbard and his mother traveled there with brief stop-overs in a couple of Chinese ports. In high school, Hubbard contributed to the school paper, but was dropped from enrollment due to failing grades. After he failed the Naval Academy entrance examination, Hubbard was enrolled in a Virginia Preparatory School to prepare him for a second attempt. However, after complaining of eye strain, Hubbard was diagnosed with myopia, precluding any future enrollment in the Naval Academy. As an adult, Hubbard would privately write to himself that his eyes had gone bad when he \"used them as an excuse to escape the naval academy\".\nHubbard was sent to the Woodward School in D.C., as graduates qualified for admission to George Washington University without having to take the entrance exam. Hubbard graduated in June 1930 and entered GWU. Academically, Hubbard did poorly and was repeatedly warned about bad grades, but he contributed to the student newspaper and was active in the glider club. In 1932, Hubbard organized a student trip to the Caribbean, but amid multiple misfortunes and insufficient funding, the passengers took to burning Hubbard in effigy and the trip was canceled by the ship's owners. Hubbard did not return to GWU the following year.\nFor much of the 1920s and 1930s, Hubbard lived in Washington D.C., and he would later claim to have interacted with multiple psychiatrists in the city. Hubbard described encounters in 1923 and 1930 with navy psychiatrist Joseph Thompson. Thompson was controversial within the American psychiatric community for his support of lay analysis, the practice of psychoanalysis by those without medical degrees. Hubbard also recalled interacting with William Alanson White, supervisor of the D.C. psychiatric hospital St. Elizabeths. According to Hubbard, both White and Thompson had regarded his athleticism and lack of interest in psychology as signs of a good prognosis. Hubbard later claimed to have been trained by both Thompson and White. Hubbard also discussed his interactions at Chestnut Lodge, a D.C.-area facility specializing in schizophrenia, repeatedly complaining that their staff misdiagnosed an unnamed individual with the condition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There's a place by the name of Walnut Lodge... They don't see anything humorous in that, by the way... They sent three people to see me and every one of them was under treatment\u2014and this was their staff! But anyway, very good people there, I'm sure... Didn't happen to meet any. Have some fine patients though! Anyway, they treat only schizophrenia. And so they take only schizophrenics. Now how do they get only schizophrenics? Well, anybody sent to Walnut Lodge is a classified schizophrenic. And they take somebody who is a dementia praecox unclassified or a more modern definition, a mania-depressive and they take him from Saint Elizabeths and they take him over to Walnut Lodge and he goes onto the books as a schizophrenic. Why? Because Walnut Lodge takes only schizophrenics.\nPre-war fiction.\nIn 1933, Hubbard renewed a relationship with a fellow glider pilot, Margaret \"Polly\" Grubb and the two were quickly married on April 13.\nThe following year, she gave birth to a son who was named Lafayette Ronald Hubbard, Jr., later nicknamed \"Nibs\". A second child, Katherine May, was born two years later. The Hubbards lived for a while in Laytonsville, Maryland, but were chronically short of money. In the spring of 1936, they moved to Bremerton, Washington. They lived there for a time with Hubbard's aunts and grandmother before finding a place of their own at nearby South Colby. According to one of his friends at the time, Robert MacDonald Ford, the Hubbards were \"in fairly dire straits for money\" but sustained themselves on the income from Hubbard's writing.\nHubbard began a writing career and tried to write for mainstream publications. Hubbard soon found his niche in the pulp fiction magazines, becoming a prolific and prominent writer in the medium. From 1934 until 1940, Hubbard produced hundreds of short stories and novels. Hubbard is remembered for his \"prodigious output\" across a variety of genres, including adventure fiction, aviation, travel, mysteries, westerns, romance, and science fiction. His first full-length novel, \"Buckskin Brigades\", was published in 1937. The novel told the story of \"Yellow Hair\", a white man adopted into the Blackfeet tribe, with promotional material claiming the author had been a \"bloodbrother\" of the Blackfeet. \"The New York Times Book Review\" praised the book, writing \"Mr. Hubbard has reversed a time-honored formula and has given a thriller to which, at the end of every chapter or so, another paleface bites the dust.\"\nOn New Year's Day, 1938, Hubbard reportedly underwent a dental procedure and reacted to the anesthetic gas used in the procedure. According to his account, this triggered a revelatory near-death experience. Allegedly inspired by this experience, Hubbard composed a manuscript, which was never published, with working titles of \"The One Command\" and \"Excalibur\". Hubbard sent telegrams to several book publishers, but nobody bought the manuscript. Hubbard wrote to his wife:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sooner or later \"Excalibur\" will be published... I have high hopes of smashing my name into history so violently that it will take a legendary form even if all books are destroyed. That goal is the real goal as far as I am concerned.\nHubbard found greater success after being taken under the supervision of editor John W. Campbell, who published many of Hubbard's short stories and serialized novelettes in his magazines \"Unknown\" and \"Astounding Science Fiction\". Hubbard's novel \"Final Blackout\" told the story of a British lieutenant who rises to become dictator of the United Kingdom. In July 1940, Campbell magazine \"Unknown\" published a psychological horror by Hubbard titled \"Fear\" about an ethnologist who becomes paranoid that demons are out to get him\u2014the work was well-received, drawing praise from Ray Bradbury, Isaac Asimov, and others. In November and December 1940, \"Unknown\" serialized Hubbard's novel \"Typewriter in the Sky\" about a pulp fiction writer whose friend becomes trapped inside one of his stories.\nMilitary career.\nIn 1941, Hubbard applied to join the United States Navy. His application was accepted, and he was commissioned as a lieutenant junior grade in the United States Naval Reserve on July\u00a019, 1941. By November, he was posted to New York for training as an intelligence officer. The day after Pearl Harbor, Hubbard was posted to the Philippines and departed the US bound for Australia. But while in Australia awaiting transport to the Philippines, Hubbard was suddenly ordered back to the United States after being accused by the US Naval Attach\u00e9 to Australia of sending blockade-runner \"Don Isidro\" \"three thousand miles out of her way\".\nIn June 1942, Hubbard was given command of a patrol boat at the Boston Navy Yard, but he was relieved after the yard commandant wrote that Hubbard was \"not temperamentally fitted for independent command\". In 1943, Hubbard was given command of a submarine chaser, but only five hours into the shakedown cruise, Hubbard believed he had detected an enemy submarine. Hubbard and crew spent the next 68 hours engaged in combat. An investigation concluded that Hubbard had likely mistaken a \"known magnetic deposit\" for an enemy sub. The following month, Hubbard unwittingly fired upon Mexican territory and was relieved of command. In 1944, Hubbard served aboard the before being transferred. The night before his departure, Hubbard reported the discovery of an attempted sabotage.\nIn June 1942, Navy records indicate that Hubbard suffered \"active conjunctivitis\" and later \"urethral discharges\". After being relieved of command of the sub-chaser, Hubbard began reporting sick, citing a variety of ailments, including ulcers, malaria, and back pains. In July 1943, Hubbard was admitted to the San Diego naval hospital for observation\u2014he would remain there for months. Years later, Hubbard would privately write to himself: \"Your stomach trouble you used as an excuse to keep the Navy from punishing you.\" On April 9, 1945, Hubbard again reported sick and was re-admitted to Oak Knoll Naval Hospital, Oakland. He was discharged from the hospital on December\u00a04, 1945.\nAfter the war.\nAfter Hubbard chose to stay in California rather than return to his family in Washington state, he moved into the Pasadena mansion of John \"Jack\" Whiteside Parsons, a rocket propulsion engineer and a leading follower of the English occultist Aleister Crowley. Hubbard befriended Parsons and soon became sexually involved with Parsons's 21-year-old girlfriend, Sara \"Betty\" Northrup. Hubbard and Parsons collaborated on \"Babalon Working\", a series of sex magic rituals intended to summon an incarnation of Babalon, the supreme Goddess in Crowley's pantheon. According to religious studies scholar Hugh Urban, Parsons' own account of the period, \"The Book of Babalon\", describes the workings as occult ceremonies based on Crowley's teaching, requiring a woman to take part in sexual rites meant to bring about the birth of a spiritual being sometimes described in Thelemic literature as a \"moonchild\" \u2013 a supernatural offspring \"mightier than all the kings of the Earth\". Parsons viewed Hubbard as being unusually sensitive to occult forces and brought him into the project as an active collaborator. He assigned Hubbard the role of \"Scribe\", responsible for channelling messages attributed to Babalon. One ritual account from March 1946 describes Hubbard speaking in the goddess's voice, portaying her as the \"flame of life, power of darkness\" who \"feeds upon the death of men\". In 1969, the Church of Scientology acknowledged that these rites had occurred and claimed that Hubbard's involvement had been an effort to rescue Betty.\nDuring this period, Hubbard authored a document which has been called the \"Affirmations\", a series of statements relating to various physical, sexual, psychological and social issues that he was encountering in his life. The Affirmations appear to have been intended to be used as a form of self-hypnosis with the intention of resolving the author's psychological problems and instilling a positive mental attitude.\nParsons, Hubbard and Sara invested nearly their entire savings \u2014 the vast majority contributed by Parsons and Sara \u2014 in a plan for Hubbard and Sara to buy yachts on the East Coast and sail them to the West Coast to sell. Hubbard had a different idea, writing to the U.S. Navy requesting permission to undertake a world cruise. Parsons attempted to recover his money by obtaining an injunction to prevent Hubbard and Sara leaving the country or disposing of the remnants of his assets, but ultimately only received a $2,900 promissory note from Hubbard. Parsons returned home \"shattered\" and was forced to sell his mansion.\nOn August 10, 1946, Hubbard married Sara, though he was still married to his first wife Polly. Hubbard resumed his fiction writing to supplement his small disability allowance. In August 1947, Hubbard returned to the pages of \"Astounding\" with a serialized novel \"The End is Not Yet\", about a young nuclear physicist who tries to stop a world takeover by building a new philosophical system. In October 1947, the magazine began serializing \"Ole Doc Methuselah\", the first in a series about the \"Soldiers of Light\", supremely skilled, extremely long-lived physicians. In February and March 1950, Campbell's \"Astounding\" serialized the Hubbard novel \"To the Stars\" about a young engineer on an interstellar trading starship who learns that months aboard ship amounts to centuries on Earth, making the ship his only remaining home after his first voyage. During his time in California, Hubbard began acting as a sort of amateur stage hypnotist or \"swami\".\nHubbard repeatedly wrote to the Veterans Administration (VA) asking for an increase in his war pension. Finally, in October 1947, he wrote to request psychiatric treatment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After trying and failing for two years to regain my equilibrium in civil life, I am utterly unable to approach anything like my own competence. My last physician informed me that it might be very helpful if I were to be examined and perhaps treated psychiatrically or even by a psychoanalyst. Toward the end of my service I avoided out of pride any mental examinations, hoping that time would balance a mind which I had every reason to suppose was seriously affected. I cannot account for nor rise above long periods of moroseness and suicidal inclinations, and have newly come to realize that I must first triumph above this before I can hope to rehabilitate myself at all. ... I cannot, myself, afford such treatment. Would you please help me?\nThe VA eventually did increase his pension, but his money problems continued. In the summer of 1948, Hubbard was arrested by the San Luis Obispo sheriff on a charge of petty theft for passing a fraudulent check. Beginning in June 1948, the nationally-syndicated wire service United Press ran a story on an American Legion-sponsored psychiatric ward in Savannah, Georgia, which sought to keep mentally-ill war veterans out of jail. In late 1948, Hubbard and his second wife Sara moved from California to Savannah, Georgia, where he would later claim to have worked as a volunteer in a psychiatric clinic. Hubbard claimed he had \"processed an awful lot of Negroes\" and wrote of having observed a psychiatrist using the threat of institutionalization in a state hospital to solicit funds from a patient's husband. In letters to friends sent from Savannah, Hubbard began to make the first public mentions of what was to become Dianetics.\nIn the Dianetics era.\nInspired by science-fiction of his friend Robert Heinlein, Hubbard announced plans to write a book which would claim to \"make supermen\". Hubbard announced to the public that there existed a superhuman condition which he called the state of \"Clear\". He claimed people in that state would have a perfectly functioning mind with an improved intelligence quotient (IQ) and photographic memory. The \"Clear\" would be cured of physical ailments ranging from poor eyesight to the common cold, which Hubbard asserted were purely psychosomatic.\nTo promote his upcoming book, Hubbard enlisted his longtime-editor John Campbell, who had a fascination with fringe psychologies and psychic powers. Campbell invited Hubbard and Sara to move into a New Jersey cottage. Campbell, in turn, recruited an acquaintance, medical doctor Joseph Winter, to help promote the book. Campbell wrote Winter to extol Hubbard, claiming that Hubbard had worked with nearly 1000 cases and cured every single one. The birth of Hubbard's second daughter Alexis Valerie, delivered by Winter on March 8, 1950, came in the middle of the preparations to launch Dianetics.\nThe basic content of Dianetics was a pseudoscientific retelling of psychoanalytic theory geared for a mass market English-speaking audience. Like Freud, Hubbard wrote that the brain recorded memories (for Hubbard, \"engrams\") which were stored in the unconscious mind (which Hubbard restyled \"the reactive mind\"). Past memories could be triggered later in life, causing psychological, emotional, or even physical problems. By sharing their memories with a friendly listener (or \"auditor\"), a person could overcome their past pain and thus cure themselves. Through Dianetics, Hubbard claimed that most illnesses were psychosomatic and caused by engrams, including arthritis, dermatitis, allergies, asthma, coronary difficulties, eye trouble, bursitis, ulcers, sinusitis and migraine headaches. He further claimed that dianetic therapy could treat these illnesses, and also included cancer and diabetes as conditions that Dianetic research was focused on.\nAccompanied by an article in \"Astounding's\" May 1950 issue, the pseudoscientific book \"\" was released on May 9. Although Dianetics was poorly received by the press and the scientific and medical professions, the book was an immediate commercial success and sparked \"a nationwide cult of incredible proportions\". Five hundred Dianetic auditing groups were set up across the United States, and Hubbard established the \"Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation\". Financial controls were lax, and Hubbard himself took large sums with no explanation of what he was doing with it.\nDianetics lost public credibility on August 10 when a presentation by Hubbard before an audience of 6,000 at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles failed disastrously. He introduced a woman named Sonya Bianca and told the audience that as a result of undergoing Dianetic therapy she now possessed perfect recall, only for her to forget the color of Hubbard's necktie. A large part of the audience walked out, and the debacle was publicized by popular science writer Martin Gardner. On September 3, psychologist Erich Fromm publicly derided \"Dianetics\" as a \"mixture of some oversimplified truths, half truths and plain absurdities\"; Fromm criticized the writing as \"propagandistic\" and likened it to the quack field of patent medicines. By late-1950, Hubbard's foundations were in financial crisis. Hubbard's publisher Arthur Ceppos, his longtime promoter John Campbell, and medical doctor-turned-Dianetics endorser Joseph Winter all resigned under acrimonious circumstances.\nIn late-1950, Hubbard began an affair with employee Barbara Klowden, prompting Sara to start her own affair with Miles Hollister. On February 23, 1951, Sara and her lover consulted with a psychiatrist about Hubbard, who advised that Sara was in grave danger and Hubbard should be institutionalized. The trio telephoned Jack Maloney, the head of the Hubbard's foundation in Elizabeth, New Jersey, to request funding for the hospitalization. Maloney informed Hubbard of the plans to institutionalize him. That night,\nHubbard and two trusted aides kidnapped Hubbard's one-year-old daughter Alexis and wife Sara and attempted unsuccessfully to find a doctor to examine Sara and declare her insane. He let Sara go but took Alexis to Cuba. Hubbard denounced Sara and her lover to the FBI, portraying them in a letter as communist infiltrators. An agent annotated his correspondence with Hubbard with the comment, \"Appears mental\".\nOn April 12, Sara's story was published in the press, leading to headlines such as \"Ron Hubbard Insane, Says His Wife\". Hubbard's first wife evidently saw the headlines and wrote to Sara on May 2 offering her support. \"Ron is not normal... Your charges probably sound fantastic to the average person\u2014but I've been through it\u2014the beatings, threats on my life, all the sadistic traits you charge\u2014twelve years of it.\" In June, Sara finally secured the return of her daughter by agreeing to a settlement in which she signed a statement, written by Hubbard, declaring that she had been misrepresented in the press and that she had always believed he was a \"fine and brilliant man\".\nThe Dianetics craze \"burned itself out as quickly as it caught fire\", and the movement appeared to be on the edge of total collapse. However, it was temporarily saved by Don Purcell, a millionaire who agreed to support a new Foundation in Wichita, Kansas. In August 1951, Hubbard published \"Science of Survival\". In that book, Hubbard introduced such concepts as the immortal soul (or \"Thetan\") and past-life regressions (or \"Whole Track Auditing\"). The Wichita Foundation underwrote the costs of printing the book, but it recorded poor sales when first published, with only 1,250 copies of the first edition being printed. The Wichita Foundation became financially nonviable after a court ruled that it was liable for the unpaid debts of its defunct predecessor in Elizabeth, New Jersey. The ruling prompted Purcell and the other directors of the Wichita Foundation to file for voluntary bankruptcy in February 1952. Hubbard resigned immediately and accused Purcell of having been bribed by the American Medical Association to destroy Dianetics. Hubbard emptied the Wichita foundation's bank accounts, in part through forgery.\nPivot to Scientology.\nHaving lost the rights to Dianetics, Hubbard created Scientology. At a convention in Wichita, Hubbard announced that he had discovered a new science beyond Dianetics which he called \"Scientology\". Whereas the goal of Dianetics had been to reach a superhuman state of \"Clear\", Scientology promised a chance to achieve god-like powers in a state called Operating Thetan. Hubbard introduced a device called an \"electropsychometer\" (or e-meter), which called for users to hold two metal cans in their hands to measure changes in skin conductivity due to variance in sweat or grip. In 1906, Swiss psychoanalyst Carl Jung had famously used such a device in a study of word association. Rather than a mundane biofeedback device, Hubbard presented the e-meter as having \"an almost mystical power to reveal an individual's innermost thoughts\".\nHubbard married a staff member, 20-year-old Mary Sue Whipp, and the pair moved to Phoenix, Arizona. Hubbard was joined by his 18-year-old son Nibs, who had become a Scientology staff member and \"professor\". Scientology was organized in a different way from the decentralized Dianetics movement \u2014 The Hubbard Association of Scientologists (HAS) was the only official Scientology organization. Branches or \"orgs\" were organized as franchises, rather like a fast food restaurant chain. Each franchise holder was required to pay ten percent of income to Hubbard's central organization. In July, Hubbard published \"What to Audit\" (later re-titled \"\"), which taught everyone has subconscious traumatic memories of their past lives as clams, sloths, and cavemen which cause neuroses and health problems. In November 1952, Hubbard published \"Scientology 8-80\", followed up in December with \"Scientology 8-8008\", which argued that the physical universe is the creation of the mind.103\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I'm going to send him back a letter. Uh... so... uh... you say you have some connection with the Prince of Darkness out there and you're very worried about this. Who do you think I am?\"\nHubbard in December 1952.\nIn December, Hubbard gave a seventy-hour series of lectures in Philadelphia that was attended by 38 people in which he delved into the occult. In the lectures, Hubbard connects rituals and the practice of Scientology to the magickal practices of Aleister Crowley, recommending Crowley's book \"The Master Therion\". During the Philadelphia course, Hubbard joked that he was \"the prince of darkness\", which was met with laughter from the audience. On December 16, 1952, Hubbard was arrested in the middle of a lecture for failing to return $9,000 withdrawn from the Wichita Foundation. He eventually settled the debt by paying $1,000 and returning a car belonging to Wichita financier Don Purcell.\nIn April 1953, Hubbard proposed setting up a chain of \"Spiritual Guidance Centers\" as part of what he called \"the religion angle\". On December 18, 1953, Hubbard incorporated the Church of Scientology in Camden, New Jersey. The religious transformation was explained as a way to protect Scientologists from charges of practicing medicine without a license. The idea may not have been new; Hubbard has been quoted as telling a science fiction convention in 1948: \"Writing for a penny a word is ridiculous. If a man really wants to make a million dollars, the best way would be to start his own religion.\"\nIn the Church of Scientology era.\nBy 1954, the IRS recognized the Church of Scientology of California as a tax-exempt organization and by 1966, the Washington, D.C. Founding Church of Scientology received tax-exempt status nationwide. The Church of Scientology became a highly profitable enterprise for Hubbard, as he was paid a percentage of the Church's gross income. By 1957 he was being paid about $250,000 per year (equivalent to $ million in 2024). His family grew, too, with Mary Sue giving birth to three more children\u2014Quentin on January 6, 1954; Suzette on February 13, 1955; and Arthur on June 6, 1958.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The purpose of the suit is to harass and discourage rather than to win. The law can be used very easily to harass\"\n L. Ron Hubbard\nHubbard was notorious for his policies of attacking his perceived enemies. Nibs recalled that Hubbard \"only knew how to do one thing and that was to destroy people.\" Hubbard told Scientologists to \"Don't ever defend, always attack\", encouraging them to find or manufacture evidence and to file harassing lawsuits against enemies. Any individual breaking away from Scientology and setting up his own group was to be shut down. Most of the formerly independent Scientology and Dianetics groups were either driven out of business or were absorbed into Hubbard's organizations. Hubbard finally achieved victory over Don Purcell in 1954 when the latter, worn out by constant litigation, handed the copyrights of Dianetics back to Hubbard.\nAfter dealing with Purcell, Hubbard turned his attention to attacking psychiatrists, who he blamed for the backlash against Dianetics and Scientology. In 1955, Hubbard authored a text titled: \"Brain-Washing: A Synthesis of the Russian Textbook on Psychopolitics\" which purported to be a secret manual linking Psychiatry and Communism written by a Soviet secret police chief. Hubbard founded the \"National Academy of American Psychology\" which sought to issue a \"loyalty oath\" to psychologists and psychiatrists. Those who opposed the oath were to be labeled \"Subversive psychiatrists\", while those who merely refused to sign the oath would be labeled \"Potentially Subversive\". Hubbard denounced psychiatric abuses, writing that psychoanalysis had been \"superseded by tyrannous sadism, practiced by unprincipled men\". Wrote Hubbard:\nToday men who call themselves analysts are merrily sawing out patients' brains, shocking them with murderous drugs, striking them with high voltages, burying them underneath mounds of ice, placing them in restraints, 'sterilizing' them sexually and generally conducting themselves much as their patients would were they given the chance.\nIn 1956, Hubbard released \"Fundamentals of Thought\", which teaches that life is a game and divides people into pieces, players, and game-makers. \nThe following year, Hubbard published \"All About Radiation\", which falsely claimed that radiation poisoning and even cancer can be cured by vitamins. In 1958, amid widespread interest in the Bridey Murphy case, Hubbard authored \"Have You Lived Before This Life?\", a collection of past life regressions.\nIn 1958, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service withdrew the Washington, D.C., Church of Scientology's tax exemption after it found that Hubbard and his family were profiting unreasonably from Scientology's ostensibly non-profit income. In the spring of 1959, Hubbard purchased Saint Hill Manor, an 18th-century English country house formerly owned by the Maharaja of Jaipur. The house became Hubbard's permanent residence and an international training center for Scientologists.\nThat year Hubbard learned his son Nibs had resigned from the organization, citing financial difficulties. Hubbard regarded the departure as a betrayal. Hubbard introduced \"security checking\", a structured interrogation using the e-meter, to identify those he termed \"potential trouble sources\" and \"suppressive persons\". Members of the Church of Scientology were interrogated with the aid of E-meters and were asked questions such as \"Have you ever practiced homosexuality?\" and \"Have you ever had unkind thoughts about L. Ron Hubbard?\"\nSince its inception, Hubbard marketed Dianetics and Scientology through false medical claims. On January 4, 1963, US Food and Drug Administration agents raided American offices of the Church of Scientology, seizing over a hundred E-meters as illegal medical devices, thousands of pills being marketed as \"radiation cures\", and tons of literature that they accused of making false medical claims.\nIn November 1963 Victoria, Australia, the government opened an inquiry into the Church, which was accused of brainwashing, blackmail, extortion and damaging the mental health of its members. Its report, published in October 1965, condemned every aspect of Scientology and Hubbard himself. The report led to Scientology being banned in Victoria, Western Australia and South Australia, and led to more negative publicity around the world. Public perceptions of Scientology changed from \"relatively harmless, if cranky\" to an \"evil, dangerous\" group that performs hypnosis and brainwashing. Scientology attracted increasingly unfavorable publicity across the English-speaking world.\nHubbard took major new initiatives in the face of these challenges. By 1965, \"Ethics Technology\" was introduced to tighten internal discipline within Scientology. It required Scientologists to \"disconnect\" from any organization or individual\u2014including family members\u2014deemed to be disruptive or \"suppressive\". Scientologists were also required to write \"Knowledge Reports\" on each other, reporting transgressions or misapplications of Scientology methods. Hubbard promulgated a long list of punishable \"Misdemeanors\", \"Crimes\", and \"High Crimes\". At the start of March 1966, Hubbard created the Guardian's Office (GO), a new agency within the Church of Scientology that was headed by his wife Mary Sue. It dealt with Scientology's external affairs, including public relations, legal actions and the gathering of intelligence on perceived threats.\nAs Scientology faced increasingly negative media attention, the GO retaliated with hundreds of writs for libel and slander; it issued more than forty on a single day. Hubbard ordered his staff to find \"lurid, blood sex crime actual evidence [\"sic\"] on [Scientology's] attackers\". The \"fair game\" policy was codified in 1967, which was applicable to anyone deemed an \"enemy\" of Scientology: \"May be deprived of property or injured by any means by any Scientologist without any discipline of the Scientologist. May be tricked, sued or lied to or destroyed.\"\nNewspapers and politicians in the UK pressed the British government for action against Scientology. In April 1966, hoping to form a remote \"safe haven\" for Scientology, Hubbard traveled to the southern African country Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe). Despite his attempts to curry favor with the local government, Rhodesia promptly refused to renew Hubbard's visa, compelling him to leave the country. Finally, at the end of 1966, Hubbard acquired his own fleet of three ships. In July 1968, the British Minister of Health announced that foreign Scientologists would no longer be permitted to enter the UK and Hubbard himself was excluded from the country as an \"undesirable alien\". Further inquiries were launched in Canada, New Zealand and South Africa.\nIn the Sea Org era.\nHubbard purchased a ship in Las Palmas and founded the \"Sea Org\", a private navy of elite Scientologists. Hubbard set out to take command of the ship. Enroute, he wrote OT III, the esoteric story of Xenu. In a letter to his wife Mary Sue, Hubbard said that, in order to assist his research, he was drinking alcohol and taking stimulants and depressants. In OT III, Hubbard wrote of alleged secrets of an immense disaster that had occurred \"on this planet, and on the other seventy-five planets which form this Confederacy, seventy-five million years ago\". It teaches that Xenu, the leader of the Galactic Confederacy, had shipped billions of people to Earth and blown them up with hydrogen bombs, following which their traumatized spirits were stuck together at \"implant stations\", brainwashed with false memories and eventually became contained within human beings.\nWhen Hubbard established the Sea Org he publicly declared that he had relinquished his management responsibilities over the Church of Scientology. In fact, he received daily telex messages from Scientology organizations around the world reporting their statistics and income. The Church of Scientology sent him $15,000 a week () along with millions of dollars that were transferred to bank accounts. Church of Scientology couriers arrived regularly, conveying luxury food for Hubbard and his family or cash that had been smuggled from England to avoid currency export restrictions. Hubbard's fleet began sailing from port to port in the Mediterranean Sea and eastern North Atlantic, rarely staying anywhere for longer than six weeks, as Hubbard claimed he was being pursued by enemies whose interference could lead to global chaos or nuclear war.\nThough Scientologists around the world were presented with a glamorous picture of life in the Sea Org and many applied to join Hubbard aboard the fleet, the reality was rather different. Most of those joining had no nautical experience at all. Mechanical difficulties and blunders by the crews led to a series of embarrassing incidents and near-disasters. Following one incident in which the rudder of the \"Royal Scotman\" was damaged during a storm, Hubbard ordered the ship's entire crew to be reduced to a \"condition of liability\" and wear gray rags tied to their arms. The ship itself was treated the same way, with dirty tarpaulins tied around its funnel to symbolize its lower status. According to those aboard, conditions were appalling; the crew was worked to the point of exhaustion, given meager rations and forbidden to wash or change their clothes for several weeks. Hubbard maintained a harsh disciplinary regime aboard the fleet, punishing mistakes by confining people in the \"Royal Scotman\"'s bilge tanks without toilet facilities and with food provided in buckets. At other times erring crew members or students were thrown overboard with Hubbard looking on and, occasionally, filming. One member of the Sea Org recalled Hubbard punishing a little boy by confining him to the ship's chain locker.\nAboard ship, Hubbard began dispatching teams of Sea Org members to search for historic evidence of his past lives; In 1973, he published \"Mission into Time\" about those searches. Now having his own paramilitary force, orders to use R2-45 (killing someone with a .45 pistol) on specific individuals were published. From about 1970, Hubbard was attended aboard ship by the children of Sea Org members, organized as the Commodore's Messenger Organization (CMO). They were mainly young girls dressed in hot pants and halter tops, who were responsible for running errands for Hubbard such as lighting his cigarettes, dressing him or relaying his verbal commands to other members of the crew. In addition to his wife Mary Sue, he was accompanied by all four of his children by her, who were all members of the Sea Org and shared its rigors.\nAfter his prior failure in Rhodesia, Hubbard again tried to establish a safe haven in a friendly country, this time Greece. The fleet stayed at the Greek island of Corfu for several months in 1968\u20131969. Hubbard, recently expelled from Britain, renamed the ships after Greek gods\u2014the \"Royal Scotman\" was rechristened \"Apollo\"\u2014and he praised the recently established military dictatorship. Despite Hubbard's hopes, in March 1969 Hubbard and his ships were ordered to leave.\nThe practice of prominently displaying the cross in Scientology centers was instituted in 1969 following hostile press coverage where Scientology's status as a legitimate religion was being questioned. In October 1969, \"The Sunday Times\" published an expos\u00e9 by Australian journalist Alex Mitchell detailing Hubbard's occult experiences with Parsons and Aleister Crowley's teachings. The Church responded with a statement, claiming without evidence Hubbard was sent in by the US Government to \"break up Black Magic in America\" and succeeded.\nIn mid-1972, Hubbard again tried to find a safe haven, this time in Morocco, establishing contacts with the country's secret police and training senior policemen and intelligence agents in techniques for detecting subversives. The program ended in failure when it became caught up in internal Moroccan politics, and Hubbard left the country hastily in December 1972. After French prosecutors charged Hubbard with fraud and customs violations, Hubbard risked extradition to France.94 In response, at the end of 1972, Hubbard left the Sea Org fleet temporarily, living incognito in Queens, New York. Hubbard's health deteriorated significantly during this period, as he was an overweight chain-smoker, suffered from bursitis and had a prominent growth on his forehead. In September 1973 when the threat of extradition had abated, Hubbard left New York, returning to his flagship.\nHubbard suffered serious injuries in a motorcycle accident on the island of Tenerife in December 1973. In 1974, Hubbard established the Rehabilitation Project Force, a punishment program for Sea Org members who displeased him. Hubbard's son Quentin reportedly found it difficult to adjust and attempted suicide in mid-1974. Also in 1974, L. Ron Hubbard confessed to two top executives that \"People do not [leave Scientology] because of [their unconfessed sins], they leave because [they stop liking Scientology or stop believing in it]\". Hubbard warned \"If any of this information ever became public, I would lose all control of the orgs and eventually Scientology as a whole.\"\nThroughout this period, Hubbard was heavily involved in directing the activities of the Guardian's Office (GO), the legal bureau/intelligence agency. In 1973, he instigated the \"Snow White Program\" and directed the GO to remove negative reports about Scientology from government files and track down their sources. The GO carried out covert campaigns on his behalf such as Operation Bulldozer Leak, designed to convince authorities that Hubbard had no legal liability for the actions of the church. Hubbard was kept informed of these operations, including as the theft of medical records from a hospital, harassment of psychiatrists, and infiltrations of organizations such as the Better Business Bureau, American Medical Association, American Psychiatric Association, U.S. Department of Justice, and Internal Revenue Service. Paulette Cooper, a freelance journalist and Scientology critic, was subjected to at least at least 19 lawsuits, framed for sending bomb threats, and was urged to climb onto a dangerous 33rd-floor ledge by a roommate later believed to be a Guardian's Office agent.129\u2013136,167\u2013168,286,376\nIn hiding.\nAfter suffering a heart attack, Hubbard decided to relocate back to the United States. In October 1975, Hubbard moved into a hotel suite in Daytona Beach while the Fort Harrison Hotel in Clearwater, Florida, was secretly acquired as the location for the Sea Org \"land base\". According to a former member of the Sea Organization pseudonymously named \"Heidi Forrester\", in late 1975 she met with a man fitting Hubbard's description who apparently performed a Crowleyite sex magick ritual called Dianism using her.126\u201327\nOn June 11, 1976, the FBI apprehended two Guardian's Office agents inside the US Courthouse in D.C., prompting Hubbard to move cross country to a safe house in California, and later a nearby ranch. On October 28, 1976, Las Vegas police discovered Hubbard's son Quentin Hubbard unconscious in his car with a hose connected to the tailpipe. L. Ron Hubbard was furious at the news, shouting, \"That stupid fucking kid! Look what he's done to me!\" Scientologists were told that Quentin had died from encephalitis.\nOn July 8, 1977, the FBI carried out simultaneous raids on Guardian's Office locations in Los Angeles and Washington, D.C. They retrieved wiretap equipment, burglary tools and some 90,000 pages of incriminating documents. On July 15, a week after the raid, Hubbard fled with Pat Broeker to Sparks, Nevada. On August 18, 1978, Hubbard suffered from a pulmonary embolism and fell into a coma, but recovered. Hubbard summoned his personal auditor, David Mayo, to heal him.\nIn August 1979, Hubbard saw his wife for the last time. Hubbard was facing a possible indictment for his role in Operation Freakout, a campaign of attacks against journalist Paulette Cooper. In February 1980, Hubbard disappeared into deep cover in the company of two trusted messengers, Pat and Annie Broeker. For the first few years of the 1980s, Hubbard and the Broekers toured the Pacific Northwest in a recreational vehicle, later residing in Southern California. Hubbard returned to science fiction, writing \"Battlefield Earth\" (1982) and \"Mission Earth\", a ten-volume series published between 1985 and 1987.\nIn OT VIII, dated 1980, Hubbard explains the document is intended for circulation only after his death. In the document, Hubbard denounces the historic Jesus as \"a lover of young boys\" given to \"uncontrollable bursts of temper\". Hubbard explains that \"My mission could be said to fulfill the Biblical promise represented by this brief anti-Christ period.\" This was corroborated by a 1983 interview where Hubbard's son Nibs explained that his father believed he was the Anti-Christ.\n In December 1985, Hubbard allegedly attempted suicide by custom e-meter. On January 17, 1986, Hubbard suffered a stroke; he died a week later. His body was cremated and the ashes were scattered at sea.\nSources and doctrines.\nHubbard has been described as an \"eclectic and ingenious\" religious innovator who cobbled together ideas from a diverse array of sources and traditions. Hubbard explicitly cited Freud's psychoanalysis as a source for Dianetics and Scientology, renaming some terms. Hubbard's wife Sara recalled him discussing biologist Richard Semon, who had coined the term \"engram\" which became a centerpiece of Dianetics. Hubbard incorporated the 1920s psychoanalytic theory of birth trauma and taught his followers to maintain total silence during the birth process. Hubbard explicitly credited Social Darwinism pioneer Herbert Spencer who coined the phrase \"survival of the fittest\", and taught that the 'one command' given to all life is to \"survive\" and later authored a book called \"Science of Survival\".\nHubbard cited author Alfred Korzybski as an influence; after two years observing patients at St. Elizabeths Hospital in D.C. in collaboration with superintendent William Alanson White, Korzybski published a tome titled \"Science and Sanity\" outlining a doctrine he called \"General Semantics\". After Korzybski founded an \"Institute\" to promote his teachings and began offering seminars, his ideas were incorporated into the science-fiction of Hubbard-associates Van Vogt and Heinlein, who envisioned futures where research into General Semantics had transformed some individuals into superhumans; Hubbard cited this fiction in a letter announcing the central principles of Dianetics: a book that promises to \"make supermen\".\nThrough his exposure to both psychoanalysts and occultists, Hubbard drew inspiration from Eastern religions. Hubbard cited psychiatrist Joseph Thompson as teaching him the adage \"If it's not true for you, it's not true\", a purportedly-Buddhist maxim which was later incorporated into Scientology. Reincarnation, originally a dharmic doctrine, entered Western occultism through the works of Blavatsky and numerous others. Fifteen years after Blavatsky followers unveiled \"The Bridge to Freedom\", Hubbard announced \"The Bridge to \"Total\" Freedom\".\nHubbard's son Nibs said that Aleister Crowley was his father's most important source of inspiration, and scholar Hugh Urban has written extensively about the occult roots of Scientology. Nibs Hubbard said in an interview in 1983: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What a lot of people don't realize is that Scientology is black magic that is just spread out over a long time period. To perform black magic generally takes a few hours or, at most, a few weeks. But in Scientology it's stretched out over a lifetime, and so you don't see it. Like Crowley, Hubbard identified himself with diabolical figures from the Book of Revelation. Just as Aleister Crowley taught a soul could temporarily leave its body through astral projection, Hubbard taught a thetan could journey outside the body by \"going exterior\".\nHubbard also taught extensively about hypnosis and recommended a 1949 book on the subject. Hubbard told of hypnotic implants, privately teaching human religions are the product of such implants. The use of hypnosis or trance to remember past lives was an extant practice in occult circles prior to Dianetics. Hubbard incorporated a range of hypnotic techniques into Scientology auditing and courses. They are employed as a means to create dependency and obedience in his followers. Crowley and Hubbard both placed emphasis on a Goddess figure, variously called Babalon, Hathor, or Diana\u2014a name Hubbard gave to a ship and a daughter; the term Dianetics may have been inspired by the Goddess. Crowley taught a sex magic ritual called karezza or Dianism which Hubbard is believed to have practiced.\nThe e-meter was constructed by inventor Volney Mathison, who introduced it to Hubbard. Similar devices had been in use by psychiatrists and law enforcement for decades. Hubbard likened his own teachings about interstellar empires and invader forces to the early 20th-century fiction genre Space Opera. Hubbard drew upon US Navy traditions in creating the Sea Org, and he once said the Commodore's Messenger Organization had been inspired by the Hitler Youth.\nHubbard and psychiatry.\nHubbard's views on psychiatry evolved over time.\nHubbard reported many encounters with psychiatrists from the age of 12 onward. Hubbard spoke positively of his childhood and teen encounters with psychiatrists in the 1920s and 30s. At the age of 12, Hubbard, his father, and his mother were accompanied by Navy psychiatrist Joseph Cheesman Thompson on an ocean trip from Seattle to Washington, D.C. Hubbard likewise wrote positively of teenage/young-adult encounters with D.C.-based psychiatrist William Alanson White.Some of Hubbard's later works included acknowledgements of both Thompson and White, and Hubbard would later claim to have received clinical training from both Thompson and White.\nIn contrast, Hubbard spoke more critically of his later encounters with psychiatrists and psychiatric institutions. Although Hubbard had written positively of psychiatric hospital superintendent William Alanson White, White's successor Winfred Overholser was singled out for criticism. Hubbard likewise spoke critically of his encounters with a Washington, D.C., institution for the treatment of schizophrenia called \"Walnut Lodge\" (presumably Chestnut Lodge). : \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; there\u2019s a place by the name of Walnut Lodge. I... I... They don\u2019t see anything humorous in that, by the way; it\u2019s Walnut Lodge. [...] They... they... they sent three people to see, to... to see me and every one of them was under treatment. And this was their staff. But anyway, very good people there, I\u2019m sure, didn\u2019t happen to meet any. Have some fine patients though. Anyway, they... they treat only schizophrenia. And so they take only schizophrenics. Now how do they get only schizophrenics?\nWell, anybody sent to Walnut Lodge is a classified schizophrenic. And they take somebody who is a dementia praecox unclassified or a more modern definition, a mania-depressive and they take him from Saint Elizabeth\u2019s and they take him over to Walnut Lodge and he goes onto the books as a schizophrenic. Why? Because Walnut Lodge takes only schizophrenics.\nDuring the Second World War, Hubbard was hospitalized at Oak Knoll Military Hospital. In 1947, Hubbard wrote a letter to the VA requesting psychiatric treatment. The following year, Hubbard and his wife Sara moved to Savannah, Georgia, where Hubbard would later recall having been associated with a charity mental health clinic. According to Hubbard, he worked as a \"lay analyst\" or volunteer peer counselor, listening to charity patients during his time in Savannah. While in Savannah, Hubbard began working on a \"book of psychology\" about \"the cause and cure of nervous tension\"; the next year, he published \"Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health\".\nIn 1951, Hubbard's wife Sara reportedly consulted a psychiatrist who recommended Hubbard be institutionalized. Hubbard initially responded by kidnapping Sara. Thereafter, he took their daughter and fled to Havana. After Sara went public with her story, Hubbard returned her daughter. In his final known encounter with a psychiatrist, Hubbard consulted a practitioner in order to rebut public claims of his own mental illness.\nThereafter, Hubbard was increasingly hostile towards psychiatry. In the 50s, Hubbard sought to identify \"Subversive\" psychiatrists or other \"Potential Subversives\". By the early 70s, Hubbard wrote of having redefined the word \"psychiatrist\" to mean \"an antisocial enemy of the people\".\nFalse biographical claims.\nThroughout his life, Hubbard made grossly exaggerated or outright false claims about himself. His estranged son Nibs reported that \"Ninety-nine percent of what my father ever wrote or said about himself\" was false. An acquaintance who knew Hubbard in Pasadena recalled recognizing Hubbard's epic autobiographical tales as being adapted from the writings of others. In October 1984, an American judge issued a ruling, writing of Hubbard that \"the evidence portrays a man who has been virtually a pathological liar when it comes to his history, background and achievements.\" In his private \"Affirmations\", Hubbard wrote to himself: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You can tell all the romantic tales you wish... you know which ones were lies... You are gallant and dashing and need tell no lies at all. You have enough real experience to make anecdotes forever. Stick to your true adventures. Or if you wish, as you will, tell adventures which happened to others \u2013 People accept them better.\nHubbard described his grandfather as a \"wealthy Western cattleman\", but contemporary records show that Hubbard's grandfather, Lafayette Waterbury, was a veterinarian, not a rancher, and was not wealthy. Hubbard claimed to be a \"blood brother\" of the Native American Blackfeet tribe, but Hubbard lived over a hundred miles from the Blackfeet reservation and the tribe did not practice blood brotherhood. Hubbard claimed to have been the youngest Eagle Scout in Boy Scouts history, but in fact the organization kept no records of the ages of Eagle Scouts.\nHubbard claimed to have traveled to Manchuria, but his diary did not record it. Hubbard claimed to be a graduate engineer, but in fact he earned poor grades at university, was placed on probation in September 1931 and dropped out altogether in the fall of 1932.3131 Hubbard used the title \"Doctor\", but his only doctorate was from a diploma mill. Hubbard claimed to have been crippled and blinded in combat, but records show he was never wounded and never received a Purple Heart (a decoration given to all US servicemen wounded in action). Hubbard's Navy service records indicate that he received only four campaign medals rather than the twenty-one claimed by Church biographies.\nLegacy.\nHubbard was survived by his wife Mary Sue and all of his children except his second son Quentin. His will provided a trust fund to support Mary Sue; her children Arthur, Diana and Suzette; and Katherine, the daughter of his first wife Polly. He disinherited two of his other children. L. Ron Hubbard, Jr. had become estranged, changed his name to \"Ronald DeWolf\" and, in 1982, sued unsuccessfully for control of his father's estate. Alexis Valerie, Hubbard's daughter by his second wife Sara, had attempted to contact her father in 1971. She was rebuffed with the implied claim that her real father was Jack Parsons rather than Hubbard, and that her mother had been a Nazi spy during the war. Both later accepted settlements when litigation was threatened. In 2001, Diana and Suzette were reported to still be Church members, while Arthur had left and become an artist. Hubbard's great-grandson, Jamie DeWolf, is a noted slam poet.\nOpinions are divided about Hubbard's literary legacy. One sociologist argued that even at Hubbard's peak in the late 1930s, he was regarded as merely \"a passable, familiar author but not one of the best\", while by the late-1970s \"the [science fiction] subculture wishes it could forget him\" and fans gave him a worse rating than any other of the \"Golden Age\" writers. \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" argues that while Hubbard could not be considered a peer of the \"prime movers\" like Asimov, Heinlein, and Sprague de Camp, Hubbard could be classed with Van Vogt as \"rogue members of the early Campbell pantheon\". Hubbard received various posthumous awards, having a street named after in him in Los Angeles and recognition of his birthday in Utah and New Jersey.\nHubbard's teachings led to numerous offshoots and splinter groups. In 1966, two former Scientologists founded the Process Church of the Final Judgment which mixed Hubbard's teachings with Satanism. In 1969, a group led by former Scientologists Charles Manson and Bruce M. Davis was arrested and later convicted for their role in a series of high-profile murders. In 1971, former Scientologist Werner Erhard founded EST, a notable large group awareness training. In 1998, Keith Raniere drew upon Hubbard's writings and Erhard's techniques to create the large group awareness training ESP, a forerunner to the group NXIVM. Raniere offered students a chance to reach a superhuman state called \"Unified\" and taught Hubbard's doctrine of \"suppressive persons\"; Raniere was ultimately sentenced to 120 years for a pattern of crimes, including the sexual exploitation of a child, sex trafficking of women, and conspiracy to commit forced labor. In 2010, the Nation of Islam began introducing its followers to Hubbard's teachings, with leader Louis Farrakhan proclaiming \"I thank God for Mr. L. Ron Hubbard!\"\nIn Scientology.\nAfter his death, Scientology leaders announced that Hubbard's body had become an impediment to his work and that he had decided to \"drop his body\" to continue his research. The copyrights of his works and much of his estate were willed to the Church of Scientology. According to the church, Hubbard's entire corpus of Scientology and Dianetics texts are etched onto steel tablets in a vault under a mountain, on top of which a Hubbard-designed logo has been bulldozed, intended to be visible from space.\nHubbard's presence pervades Scientology, and his birthday is celebrated annually. Every Church of Scientology maintains an office reserved for Hubbard, with a desk, chair and writing equipment, ready to be used. Hubbard is regarded as the ultimate source of Scientology, and is often referred to as simply \"Source\", and he has no successor. Scientology has been described as \"a movement focused on the figure of Hubbard\". Hubbard is presented as \"the master of a multitude of disciplines\" who performed extraordinary feats as a photographer, composer, scientist, therapist, explorer, navigator, philosopher, poet, artist, humanitarian, adventurer, soldier, scout, musician and many other fields of endeavor. Busts and portraits of Hubbard are commonplace throughout Scientology organizations, and meetings involve a round of applause to Hubbard's portrait. In 2009, the American Religious Identification Survey found that 25,000 Americans identified as Scientologists.\nScientology's sacred texts are inextricably linked to L. Ron Hubbard. According to Scientology's official doctrine, \"Hubbard is the sole author or narrator of each and every one of the religion's sacred books; indeed he is considered to be the single orchestrating genius behind everything Scientological.\" Scientologists consider everything Hubbard ever said in verbal or written terms as \"scripture\".\nIn popular culture.\nIn the mid-1980s, the church began to promote Dianetics with a radio and television advertising blitz that was \"virtually unprecedented in book circles\". In March 1988, Dianetics topped the best-seller lists nationwide through an organized campaign of mass bookbuying. Booksellers reported patrons buying hundreds of copies at once and later receiving ostensibly-new books from the publisher with store price stickers already attached. Hubbard's number of followers peaked in the early 1990s with roughly 100,000 scientologists worldwide.\nOn November 21, 1997, the Fox network aired an episode of X-Files spinoff \"Millennium\" titled \"Jose Chung's Doomsday Defense\" which satirized Lafayette Ronald Hubbard's biography in a brief opening narration about a character named \"Juggernaut Onan Goopta\" who dreamt of becoming a neuroscientist only to discover that \"his own brain could not comprehend basic biology\". The character switches to philosophy, but \"while reading Kirkegaard's 'The Sickness unto Death', he became sick and nearly died\"; After writing an entire book in a \"single, feverish night\" that changed the course of human history, the character began lecturing to standing room only crowds, \"for he shrewdly refrained from providing chairs\". In a satire of both Hubbard and George Santayana, the character explains that painful memories must be exterminated, saying \"those who cannot forget their past, are condemned to repeat it\". The character establishes an institute where patients are called 'doctors' and founds a religious order called Selfosophy staffed by an elite paramilitary inspired by the US Postal Service. We are told the character died of cancer or \"molted his earthly encumbrance to pursue his Selfosophical research in another dimension\".\nOn February 8, 1998, Fox comedy \"The Simpsons\" broadcast \"The Joy of Sect\", satirizing Hubbard and Scientology when the family joins a group called the Movementarians ruled over by a figure called \"The Leader\" who physically resembles L. Ron Hubbard. The Movementarians' use of a 10-trillion-year commitment for its members alludes to the billion-year contract and both groups make extensive use of litigation. One of \"The Simpsons\"' voice actors, Nancy Cartwright, is herself a Scientologist.\nIn 2000, Hubbard's novel was adapted into a film called \"Battlefield Earth\", starring long-time Scientology celebrity John Travolta. In 2001, a film titled \"The Profit\" parodied Scientology and Hubbard. In 2005, animated comedy \"South Park\" aired the episode \"Trapped in the Closet\" in which protagonist Stan is believed to be the reincarnation of Hubbard. The episode broadcast the great secret behind the church\u2014a condensed version of the Xenu story while an on-screen caption reads \"This is what Scientologists actually believe\". Prior to the episode, the story was almost completely unknown in mainstream culture.\nPaul Thomas Anderson's 2012 film \"The Master\" features a religious leader named Lancaster Dodd, played by Philip Seymour Hoffman, who is based on Hubbard and shares a physical resemblance to him. The film depicts a Navy washout with psychological issues who is unable to hold down steady employment after the war. Facing potential legal troubles, he flees California by stowing away on a ship captained by self-proclaimed nuclear physicist and philosopher Lancaster Dodd, leader of a movement called \"The Cause\".\nOn December 5, 2013, \"The Eric Andre Show\" aired a comedy sketch titled \"Black Scientologists\" where Andr\u00e9's character proclaims \"Not a lot of people know this, but L. Ron Hubbard was a black man. His real name was L. Ron Hoyabembe!\", while revealing an artist's conception of Hubbard wearing an afro.\nIn April 2015, following the recent release of \"Going Clear: Scientology and the Prison of Belief\", \"Saturday Night Live\" aired a music video featuring the \"Church of Neurotology\", a parody of Scientology's 1990 music video \"We Stand Tall\". Bobby Moynihan played a Hubbard-lookalike in the video. From 2018 to 2019, the show \"Strange Angel\" dramatized the life of Jack Parsons. In the season 2 finale, actor Daniel Abeles played Hubbard.\nAccording to Hugh B. Urban in the book \"Handbook of Scientology\", the nature of popular media accounts of Scientology is largely due to its culture of secrecy. An example of Scientology being \"America's most secretive religion\" is the documentary \"The Secrets of Scientology\". Urban states, \"However, while these popular accounts are often sensational and not particularly balanced, they do highlight the fact that secrecy has in fact been a pervasive aspect of the church from its inception.\"279\nSelect works.\nHubbard was a prolific writer and lecturer across a wide variety of genres. His works of fiction include several hundred short stories and many novels. According to the Church of Scientology, Hubbard produced some 65\u00a0million words on Dianetics and Scientology, contained in about 500,000 pages of written material, 3,000 recorded lectures and 100 films.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17864", "revid": "50945982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17864", "title": "Luddite", "text": "Member of an 1810s English anti-textile-machinery organisation\nThe Luddites were members of a 19th-century movement of English textile workers who opposed the use of certain types of automated machinery due to concerns relating to worker pay and output quality. They often destroyed the machines in organised raids. Members of the group referred to themselves as Luddites, self-described followers of \"Ned Ludd\", a legendary weaver whose name was used as a pseudonym in threatening letters to mill owners and government officials.\nThe Luddite movement began in Nottingham, England, and spread to the North West and Yorkshire between 1811 and 1816. Mill and factory owners took to shooting protesters and eventually the movement was suppressed by legal and military force, which included execution and penal transportation of accused and convicted Luddites.\nOver time, the term has been used to refer to those opposed to the introduction of new technologies.\nEtymology.\nThe name Luddite () occurs in the movement's writings as early as 1811. The movement utilised the eponym of Ned Ludd, an apocryphal apprentice who allegedly smashed two stocking frames in 1779 after being criticised and instructed to change his method. The name often appears as Captain, General, or King Ludd. Different versions of the legends place his residence in Anstey, near Leicester, or Sherwood Forest.\nHistory.\nHistorical precedents.\nThe machine-breaking of the Luddites followed from previous outbreaks of sabotage in the English textile industry, especially in the hosiery and woollen trades. Organised action by stockingers had occurred at various times since 1675. In Lancashire, new cotton spinning technologies were met with violent resistance in 1768 and 1779. These new inventions produced textiles faster and cheaper because they could be operated by less-skilled, low-wage labourers. These struggles sometimes resulted in government suppression, via Parliamentary acts such as the Protection of Stocking Frames, etc. Act 1788.\nPeriodic uprisings relating to asset prices also occurred in other contexts in the century before Luddism. Irregular rises in food prices provoked the Keelmen to riot in the port of Tyne in 1710 and tin miners to steal from granaries at Falmouth in 1727. There was a rebellion in Northumberland and Durham in 1740, and an assault on Quaker corn dealers in 1756.\nMalcolm L. Thomas argued in his 1970 history \"The Luddites\" that machine-breaking was one of the very few tactics that workers could use to increase pressure on employers, undermine lower-paid competing workers, and create solidarity among workers. \"These attacks on machines did not imply any necessary hostility to machinery as such; machinery was just a conveniently exposed target against which an attack could be made.\" Historian Eric Hobsbawm has called their machine wrecking \"collective bargaining by riot\", which had been a tactic used in Britain since the Restoration because manufactories were scattered throughout the country, and that made it impractical to hold large-scale strikes. An agricultural variant of Luddism occurred during the widespread Swing Riots of 1830 in southern and eastern England, centring on breaking threshing machines.\nPeak activity: 1811\u20131817.\nThe Luddite movement emerged during the harsh economic climate of the Napoleonic Wars, which saw a rise in difficult working conditions in the new textile factories paired with decreasing birth rates and a rise in education standards in England and Wales. Luddites objected primarily to the rising popularity of automated textile equipment, threatening the jobs and livelihoods of skilled workers as this technology allowed them to be replaced by cheaper and less skilled workers. The movement began in Arnold, Nottinghamshire, on 11 March 1811 and spread rapidly throughout England over the following two years. The British economy suffered greatly in 1810 to 1812, especially in terms of high unemployment and inflation. The causes included the high cost of the wars with Napoleon, Napoleon's Continental System of economic warfare, and escalating conflict with the United States. The crisis led to widespread protest and violence, but the middle classes and upper classes strongly supported the government, which used the army to suppress all working-class unrest, especially the Luddite movement.\nThe Luddites met at night on the moors surrounding industrial towns to practise military-like drills and manoeuvres. Their main areas of operation began in Nottinghamshire in November 1811, followed by the West Riding of Yorkshire in early 1812, and then Lancashire by March 1813. They wrecked specific types of machinery that posed a threat to the particular industrial interests in each region. In the Midlands, these were the \"wide\" knitting frames used to make cheap and inferior lace articles. In the North West, weavers sought to eliminate the steam-powered looms threatening wages in the cotton trade. In Yorkshire, workers opposed the use of shearing frames and gig mills to finish woollen cloth.\nMany Luddite groups were highly organised and pursued machine-breaking as one of several tools for achieving specific political ends. In addition to the raids, Luddites coordinated public demonstrations and the mailing of letters to local industrialists and government officials. These letters explained their reasons for destroying the machinery and threatened further action if the use of \"obnoxious\" machines continued. The writings of Midlands Luddites often justified their demands through the legitimacy of the Company of Framework Knitters, a recognised public body that already openly negotiated with masters through named representatives. In North West England, textile workers lacked these long-standing trade institutions and their letters composed an attempt to achieve recognition as a united body of tradespeople. As such, they were more likely to include petitions for governmental reforms, such as increased minimum wages and the cessation of child labor. Northwestern Luddites were also more likely to use radical language linking their movement to that of American and French revolutionaries. In Yorkshire, the letter-writing campaign shifted to more violent threats against local authorities viewed as complicit in the use of offensive machinery to exert greater commercial control over the labour market.\nIn Yorkshire, the croppers (highly skilled workers who trimmed the nap from fabric to produce smooth, finished cloth) faced mass unemployment due to the introduction of cropping machines by Enoch Taylor of Marsden. This sparked the Luddite movement among the croppers of Yorkshire, who used a hammer dubbed \"Enoch\" to break the frames of the cropping machines. They called it Enoch to mock Enoch Taylor, and when they broke the frames they purportedly shouted \"Enoch made them, and Enoch shall break them.\"\nLuddites clashed with government troops at Burton's Mill in Middleton and at Westhoughton Mill, both in Lancashire. The Luddites and their supporters anonymously sent death threats to, and possibly attacked, magistrates and food merchants. Activists smashed Heathcote's lace making machine in Loughborough in 1816. He and other industrialists had secret chambers constructed in their buildings that could be used as hiding places during an attack.\nIn 1817 Jeremiah Brandreth, an unemployed Nottingham stockinger and probable ex-Luddite, led the Pentrich Rising. While this was a general uprising unrelated to machinery, it can be viewed as the last major Luddite act.\nGovernment response.\n12,000 government troops, most of them belonging to militia or yeomanry units, were involved in suppression of Luddite activity, which historian Eric Hobsbawm wrote was a larger number than the army that the Duke of Wellington led into Portugal in 1808 during the Peninsular War. Four Luddites, led by a man named George Mellor, ambushed and assassinated mill owner William Horsfall of Ottiwells Mill in Marsden, West Yorkshire, at Crosland Moor in Huddersfield. Horsfall had remarked that he would \"Ride up to his saddle in Luddite blood\". Mellor fired the fatal shot to Horsfall's groin, and all four men were arrested. One of the men, Benjamin Walker, turned informant, and the other three were hanged. Lord Byron denounced what he considered to be the plight of the working class, the government's inane policies and ruthless repression in the House of Lords on 27 February 1812:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have been in some of the most oppressed provinces of Turkey; but never, under the most despotic of infidel governments, did I behold such squalid wretchedness as I have seen since my return, in the very heart of a Christian country.\nGovernment officials sought to suppress the Luddite movement with a mass trial at York in January 1813, following the attack on Cartwrights Mill at Rawfolds near Cleckheaton. The government charged over 60 men, including Mellor and his companions, with various crimes in connection with Luddite activities. While some of those charged were actual Luddites, many had no connection to the movement. Although the proceedings were legitimate jury trials, many were abandoned due to lack of evidence and 30 men were acquitted. These trials were intended to act as show trials to deter other Luddites from continuing their activities. The harsh sentences of those found guilty, which included execution and penal transportation, quickly ended the movement. Parliament made \"machine breaking\" (i.e. industrial sabotage) a capital crime with the Destruction of Stocking Frames, etc. Act 1812. Lord Byron opposed this legislation, becoming one of the few prominent defenders of the Luddites after the treatment of the defendants at the York trials.\nLegacy.\nThe Luddites (specifically the croppers, those who operated cropping machinery) are memorialised in the Yorkshire-area folk song \"The Cropper Lads\", which has been recorded by artists including Lou Killen and Maddy Prior. The croppers were very highly skilled and highly paid before the introduction of cropping machinery, and thus had more to lose and more reason to rebel against the factory owners' use of machinery. Another traditional song which celebrates the Luddites is the song \"The Triumph of General Ludd\", which was recorded by Chumbawamba for their 1988 album \"English Rebel Songs\".\nIn the 19th century, occupations that arose from the growth of trade and shipping in ports, also as \"domestic\" manufacturers, were notorious for precarious employment prospects. Underemployment was chronic during this period, and it was common practice to retain a larger workforce than was typically necessary for insurance against labour shortages in boom times.\nMoreover, the organisation of manufacture by merchant capitalists in the textile industry was inherently unstable. While the financiers' capital was still largely invested in raw materials, it was easy to increase commitment when trade was good and almost as easy to cut back when times were bad. Merchant capitalists lacked the incentive of later factory owners, whose capital was invested in buildings and plants, to maintain a steady rate of production and return on fixed capital. The combination of seasonal variations in wage rates and violent short-term fluctuations springing from harvests and war produced periodic outbreaks of violence.\nModern usage.\nNowadays, the term \"Luddite\" often is used to describe someone who is opposed or resistant to new technologies.\nIn 1956, during a British Parliamentary debate, a Labour spokesman said that \"organised workers were by no means wedded to a 'Luddite Philosophy'.\" By 2006, the term \"neo-Luddism\" had emerged to describe opposition to many forms of technology. According to a manifesto drawn up by the Second Luddite Congress (April 1996; Barnesville, Ohio), neo-Luddism is \"a leaderless movement of passive resistance to consumerism and the increasingly bizarre and frightening technologies of the Computer Age\".\nThe term \"Luddite fallacy\" is used by economists about the fear that technological unemployment inevitably generates structural unemployment and is consequently macroeconomically injurious. If a technological innovation reduces necessary labour inputs in a given sector, then the industry-wide cost of production falls, which lowers the competitive price and increases the equilibrium supply point that, theoretically, will require an increase in aggregate labour inputs. During the 20th century and the first decade of the 21st century, the dominant view among economists has been that belief in long-term technological unemployment was indeed a fallacy. More recently, there has been increased support for the view that the benefits of automation are not equally distributed.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17865", "revid": "48035739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17865", "title": "Anarchist communism", "text": "Political school of thought\nAnarchist communism is a far-left political ideology and anarchist school of thought that advocates a form of stateless communism. It calls for the abolition of private real property but retention of personal property and collectively-owned items, goods, and services. It supports social ownership of property and the distribution of resources (i.e. from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs).\nAnarchist communism was first formulated as such in the Italian section of the International Workingmen's Association. The theoretical work of Peter Kropotkin took importance later as it expanded and developed pro-organizationalist and insurrectionary anti-organizationalist section. Examples of anarchist communist societies are the anarchist territories of the Makhnovshchina during the Russian Revolution, and those of the Spanish Revolution, most notably revolutionary Catalonia.\nHistory.\nForerunners.\nThe modern current of communism was founded by the Neo-Babouvists\nof the journal (published in mid-1841), who drew from the \"anti-political and anarchist ideas\" of Sylvain Mar\u00e9chal. The foundations of anarcho-communism were laid by Th\u00e9odore D\u00e9zamy in his 1843 work \"Code de la Communaut\u00e9\", which he formulated as a critique of \u00c9tienne Cabet's utopian socialism. In his \"Code\", D\u00e9zamy advocated the abolition of money, of the division of labour and of the state. He also championed the introduction of common ownership of property and the distribution of resources \"from each according to their ability, to each according to their needs\". In anticipation of anarchist communism, D\u00e9zamy rejected the need for a transitional stage between capitalism and communism, instead calling for immediate communisation through the direct cessation of commerce.\nFollowing the French Revolution of 1848, Joseph D\u00e9jacque formulated a radical form of communism that opposed both the revolutionary republicanism of Auguste Blanqui and the mutualism of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon. D\u00e9jacque opposed the authoritarian conception of a \"dictatorship of the proletariat\" as discussed by Joseph Weydemeyer and by Karl Marx from 1852 onwards; he regarded it as inherently reactionary and counter-revolutionary. Instead, he upheld the autonomy and self-organisation of workers, which he saw expressed during the 1848 June Days uprising in Paris against the representative politics of governmentalism. Opposed not just to government, but to all forms of oppression, D\u00e9jacque advocated for a social revolution to abolish the state, as well as religion, what would become known as the nuclear family, and private property. In their place, D\u00e9jacque upheld a form of anarchy based on the free distribution of resources.\nD\u00e9jacque particularly focused his critique on private commerce, such as that espoused by Proudhon and by the Ricardian socialists of the 1820s and 1830s. He advocated workers' right to the satisfaction of their needs, rather than to keep the product of their own labour, as he felt the latter would inevitably lead to capital accumulation. He thus advocated for all property to be held under common ownership and for \"unlimited freedom of production and consumption\", subordinated only to the authority of the \"statistics book\". In order to guarantee the universal satisfaction of needs, D\u00e9jacque saw the need for the abolition of forced labour through workers' self-management, and the abolition of the division of labour through integrating the proletariat and the intelligentsia into a single class. In order to achieve this vision of a communist society, he proposed a transitionary period of in which direct democracy and direct exchange would be upheld, positions of state would undergo democratization, and the police and military would be abolished.\nD\u00e9jacque's communist platform, outlined in his \"Humanisphere\" (1859), preceded the program of the 1871 Paris Commune, and anticipated the anarcho-communism later elaborated by Errico Malatesta, Peter Kropotkin and Luigi Galleani.\nFormulation in the International Workingmen's Association.\nThe International Workingmen's Association (IWA) was established in 1864, at a time when a formalised anarchist movement did not yet exist. Of the few individual anarchists who were influential at this time, it was Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, with his conception of federalism and his advocacy of abstentionism, who inspired many of the French delegates who founded the IWA and laid the groundwork for the growth of anarchism. Among the French delegates were a more radical minority that opposed Proudhon's mutualism, which held the nuclear family as its base social unit. Led by the trade-unionist Eug\u00e8ne Varlin, the radicals advocated for a \"non-authoritarian communism\", which upheld the commune as the base social unit and advocated for the universal access to education. The entry of Mikhail Bakunin into the IWA in 1868 first infused the federalists with a programme of revolutionary socialism and anti-statism, which agitated for workers' self-management and direct action against capitalism and the state.\nBy this time, the Marxists of the IWA had begun to denounce their anti-authoritarian opponents as \"anarchists\", a label previously adopted by Proudhon and D\u00e9jacque and later accepted by the anti-authoritarians themselves. Following the defeat of the Paris Commune in 1871, the IWA split over questions of socialist economics and the means of bringing about a classless society. Karl Marx, who favoured the conquest of state power by political parties, banned the anarchists from the IWA. The anarchist faction around the Jura Federation resolved to reconstitute as their own Anti-Authoritarian International, which they constructed as a more decentralised and federal organisation. Two of the IWA's largest branches, in Italy and Spain, repudiated Marxism and adopted the anti-authoritarian platform.\nAs a collectivist, Bakunin had himself opposed communism, which he regarded as an inherently authoritarian ideology. But with Bakunin's death in 1876, the anarchists began to shift away from his theory of collectivism and towards an anarchist communism. The term \"anarchist communism\" was first printed in Fran\u00e7ois Dumartheray's February 1876 pamphlet, \"To manual workers, supporters of political action\". \u00c9lis\u00e9e Reclus was quick to express his support for anarchist communism, at a meeting of the Anti-Authoritarian International in Lausanne the following month. James Guillaume's August 1876 pamphlet, \"Ideas on Social Organisation\", outlined a proposal by which the collective ownership of the means of production could be used in order to transition towards a communist society. Guillaume considered a necessary prerequisite for communism would be a general condition of abundance, which could set the foundation for the abandonment of exchange value and the free distribution of resources. This program for anarcho-communism was adopted by the Italian anarchists, who had already begun to question collectivism.\nAlthough Guillaume had himself remained neutral throughout the debate, in September 1877, the Italian anarcho-communists clashed with the Spanish collectivists in Verviers at what would be the Anti-Authoritarian International's final congress. Alongside the economic question, the two factions were also divided by the question of organisation. While the collectivists upheld trade unions as a means for achieving anarchy, the communists considered them to be inherently reformist and counter-revolutionary organisations, prone to bureaucracy and corruption. Instead, the communists preferred small, loosely-organised affinity groups, which they believed closer conformed to anti-authoritarian principles.\nIn October 1880, a Congress of the defunct International's Jura Federation adopted Carlo Cafiero's programme of \"Anarchy and Communism\", which outlined a clear break with Guillaume's collectivist programme. Cafiero rejected the use of an exchange value and the collective ownership of industry, which he believed would lead to capital accumulation and consequently to social stratification. Instead, Cafiero called for the abolition of all wage labour (which he saw as a relic of capitalism) and for the distribution of resources \"from each according to their ability, to each according to their needs\".\nOrganizationalism vs. insurrectionarism and expansion.\nAs anarcho-communism emerged in the mid-19th century, it had an intense debate with Bakuninist collectivism and, within the anarchist movement, over participation in the workers' movement, as well as on other issues. So in Kropotkin's anarcho-communist theory of evolution, the risen people themselves are meant to be the rational industrial manager rather than a working class organized as enterprise.\nBetween 1880 and 1890, with the \"perspective of an immanent revolution\", which was \"opposed to the official workers' movement, which was then in the process of formation (general Social Democratisation) [anarchist communists] were opposed not only to political (statist) struggles but also to strikes which put forward wage or other claims, or which were organised by trade unions.\" However, \"[w]hile they were not opposed to strikes as such, they were opposed to trade unions and the struggle for the eight-hour day. This anti-reformist tendency was accompanied by an anti-organisational tendency, and its partisans declared themselves in favor of agitation amongst the unemployed for the expropriation of foodstuffs and other articles, for the expropriatory strike and, in some cases, for 'individual recuperation' or acts of terrorism.\"\nEven after Peter Kropotkin and others overcame their initial reservations and decided to enter labor unions, anti-syndicalist anarchist-communists remained, such as S\u00e9bastien Faure's \"Le Libertaire\" group and Russian partisans of economic terrorism and expropriations.\nMost anarchist publications in the United States appeared in Yiddish, German, or Russian. However, the American anarcho-communist journal \"The Firebrand\" was published in English, permitting the dissemination of anarchist communist thought to English-speaking populations in the United States.\nAccording to the anarchist historian Max Nettlau, the first use of the term \"libertarian communism\" came with the 1880 Le Havre anarchist congress used the phrase to identify its doctrines more clearly.\nThe French anarchist journalist S\u00e9bastien Faure, later founder and editor of the four-volume \"Anarchist Encyclopedia,\" started the weekly paper (\"The Libertarian\") in 1895.\nMethods of organizing: platformism vs. synthesism.\nIn Ukraine, the anarcho-communist guerrilla leader Nestor Makhno led an independent anarchist army from 1918 to 1921 during the Russian Civil War of 1917\u20131923. A commander of the Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine, Makhno led a guerrilla campaign opposing both the Bolshevik \"Reds\" and monarchist \"Whites\". The Makhnovist movement made various tactical military pacts while fighting various reactionary forces and organizing an anarchist society committed to resisting state authority, whether capitalist or Bolshevik.\nThe Dielo Truda platform in Spain also met with strong criticism. Miguel Jimenez, a founding member of the Iberian Anarchist Federation (FAI, founded in 1927), summarized this as follows: too much influence in it of Marxism, it erroneously divided and reduced anarchists between individualist anarchists and anarcho-communist sections, and it wanted to unify the anarchist movement along the lines of the anarcho-communists. Jimenez saw anarchism as more complex than that, that anarchist tendencies are not mutually exclusive as the platformists saw it and that both individualist and communist views could accommodate anarcho-syndicalism. S\u00e9bastian Faure had strong contacts in Spain, so his proposal had more impact on Spanish anarchists than the Dielo Truda platform, even though individualist anarchist influence in Spain was less intense than it was in France. The main goal there was reconciling anarcho-communism with anarcho-syndicalism.\nSpanish Revolution of 1936.\nThe most extensive application of anarcho-communist ideas happened in the anarchist territories during the Spanish Revolution of 1936.\nIn Spain, the national anarcho-syndicalist trade union Confederaci\u00f3n Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) initially refused to join a popular-front electoral alliance, and abstention by CNT supporters led to a right-wing election victory. In 1936, the CNT changed its policy, and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power. Months later, the former ruling class responded with an attempted coup, which led to the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War of 1936\u20131939. In response to the army rebellion, an anarchist-inspired movement of peasants and industrial workers, supported by armed militias, took control of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain, where they collectivized the land. However, even before the fascist victory in 1939, the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the Stalinists, who controlled the distribution of military aid from the Soviet Union to the Republican cause. The events known as the \"Spanish Revolution\" was a workers' social revolution that began during the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 and resulted in the widespread implementation of anarchist and, more broadly, libertarian socialist organizational principles throughout various portions of the country for two to three years, primarily in Catalonia, Aragon, Andalusia, and parts of the Levante. Much of Spain's economy was put under worker control; in anarchist strongholds like Catalonia, the figure was as high as 75%, but lower in areas with heavy Communist Party of Spain influence, as the Soviet-allied party actively resisted attempts at collectivization-enactment. Factories were run through worker committees, and agrarian areas became collectivized and ran as libertarian communes.\nAnarchist Gaston Leval estimated that about eight million people participated directly or at least indirectly in the Spanish Revolution, which historian Sam Dolgoff claimed was the closest any revolution had come to realizing a free, stateless mass society. Stalinist-led troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted both dissident Marxists and anarchists.\nPost-war years.\nAnarcho-communism entered into internal debates over the organization issue in the post-World War II era. Founded in October 1935, the Anarcho-Communist Federation of Argentina (FACA, Federaci\u00f3n Anarco-Comunista Argentina) in 1955 renamed itself the Argentine Libertarian Federation. The F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Anarchiste (FA), founded in Paris on 2 December 1945, elected the platformist anarcho-communist George Fontenis as its first secretary the following year. It was composed of a majority of activists from the former FA (which supported Volin's Synthesis) and some members of the former Union Anarchiste (which supported the CNT-FAI support to the Republican government during the Spanish Civil War), as well as some young Resistants.\nIn 1950 a clandestine group formed within the FA called Organisation Pens\u00e9e Bataille (OPB), led by George Fontenis.\nThe new decision-making process was founded on unanimity: each person has a right of veto on the orientations of the federation. The FCL published the same year . Several groups quit the FCL in December 1955, disagreeing with the decision to present \"revolutionary candidates\" to the legislative elections. On 15\u201320 August 1954, the Ve intercontinental plenum of the CNT took place. A group called appeared, which was formed of militants who did not like the new ideological orientation that the OPB was giving the FCL seeing it was authoritarian and almost Marxist. The FCL lasted until 1956, just after participating in state legislative elections with ten candidates. This move alienated some members of the FCL and thus produced the end of the organization. A group of militants who disagreed with the FA turning into FCL reorganized a new Federation Anarchiste established in December 1953. This included those who formed \"L'Entente anarchiste,\" who joined the new FA and then dissolved L'Entente. The new base principles of the FA were written by the individualist anarchist Charles-Auguste Bontemps and the non-platformist anarcho-communist Maurice Joyeux which established an organization with a plurality of tendencies and autonomy of groups organized around synthesist principles. According to historian C\u00e9dric Gu\u00e9rin, the new Federation Anarchiste identity included the unconditional rejection of Marxism, motivated in significant part by the previous conflict with George Fontenis and his OPB. In the 1970s, the French F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Anarchiste evolved into a joining of the principles of synthesis anarchism and platformism.\nPhilosophical debates.\nMotivation.\nAnarchist communists reject the belief that \"wage labour is necessary because people are selfish by human nature.\" Most would point to examples of humans being willing to sacrifice time or resources for others and believe that systems of wage labor and state taxation serve more to restrict that instinct to help others rather than ensuring a society continues to function. Anarcho-communists generally do not agree with the belief in a pre-set \"human nature\", arguing that human culture and behavior are primarily determined by socialization and the mode of production. Many anarchist communists, like Peter Kropotkin, also believe that the human evolutionary tendency is for humans to cooperate for mutual benefit and survival instead of existing as lone competitors, a position that Kropotkin argued for at length.\nWhile anarchist communists such as Peter Kropotkin and Murray Bookchin believed that the members of such a society would voluntarily perform all necessary labour because they would recognize the benefits of communal enterprise and mutual aid, other anarchist communists such as Nestor Makhno and Ricardo Flores Mag\u00f3n argue that all those able to work in an anarchist communist society should be obligated to do so, excepting groups like children, the elderly, the sick, or the infirm. Kropotkin did not think laziness or sabotage would be a significant problem in an authentically anarchist-communist society. However, he did agree that a freely associated anarchist commune could, and probably should, deliberately disassociate from those not fulfilling their communal agreement to do their share of work. Peter Gelderloos, based on the Kibbutz, argues that motivation in a moneyless society would be found in the satisfaction of work, concern for the community, competition for prestige, and praise from other community members.\nFreedom, work, and leisure.\nAnarchist communists support communism as a means for ensuring the greatest freedom and well-being for everyone, rather than only the wealthy and powerful. In this sense, anarchist communism is a profoundly egalitarian philosophy.\nKropotkin said that the main authoritarian mistakes in communist experiments of the past were their being based on \"religious enthusiasm\" and the desire to live \"as a family\" where the individual had to \"submit to the dictates of a punctilious morality\". For him, anarcho-communism should be based on the right of free association and disassociation for individuals and groups and on significantly lowering the number of hours each individual dedicates to necessary labor. He says that \"to recognise a variety of occupations as the basis of all progress and to organise in such a way that man may be absolutely free during his leisure time, whilst he may also vary his work, a change for which his early education and instruction will have prepared him\u2014this can easily be put in practice in a Communist society\u2014this, again, means the emancipation of the individual, who will find doors open in every direction for his complete development\".\nIndividualism and collectivism.\nPeter Kropotkin argued that individuals sacrificing themselves for the \"greater\", or being ruled by the \"community\" or \"society\", is not possible because society is composed of individuals rather than being a cohesive unit separate from the individual and argue that collective control over the individual is tyrannical and antithetical to anarchism. Others such as Lucien van der Walt and Michael Schmidt argue that \"[t]he anarchists did not [...] identify freedom with the right of everybody to do exactly what one pleased but with a social order in which collective effort and responsibilities\u2014that is to say, obligations\u2014would provide the material basis and social nexus in which individual freedom could exist.\" They argued that \"genuine freedom and individuality could only exist in a free society\" and that in contrast to \"misanthropic bourgeois individualism\" anarchism was based in \"a deep love of freedom, understood as a social product, a deep respect for human rights, a profound celebration of humankind and its potential and a commitment to a form of society where a 'true individuality' was irrevocably linked to 'the highest communist socieability'\".\nProperty.\nAnarchist communists counter the capitalist conception that communal property can only be maintained by force and that such a position is neither fixed in nature nor unchangeable in practice, citing numerous examples of communal behavior occurring naturally, even within capitalist systems. Anarchist communists call for the abolition of private property while maintaining respect for personal property. As such, the prominent anarcho-communist Alexander Berkman maintained that \"The revolution abolishes private ownership of the means of production and distribution, and with it goes capitalistic business. Personal possession remains only in the things you use. Thus, your watch is your own, but the watch factory belongs to the people. Land, machinery, and all other public utilities will be collective property, neither to be bought nor sold. Actual use will be considered the only title-not to ownership but to possession. The organization of the coal miners, for example, will be in charge of the coal mines, not as owners but as the operating agency. Similarly will the railroad brotherhoods run the railroads, and so on. Collective possession, cooperatively managed in the interests of the community, will take the place of personal ownership privately conducted for profit.\"\nFree association of communes as opposed to the nation-state.\nAnarcho-communism calls for a decentralized federalist structure in relationships of mutual aid and free association between communes and workers' councils, federated into a broader council system as an alternative to the centralism of the nation-state.\nPeter Kropotkin thus suggested:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Representative government has accomplished its historical mission; it has given a mortal blow to court-rule; and by its debates it has awakened public interest in public questions. But to see in it the government of the future socialist society is to commit a gross error. Each economic phase of life implies its own political phase; and it is impossible to touch the very basis of the present economic life\u2014private property\u2014without a corresponding change in the very basis of the political organization. Life already shows in which direction the change will be made. Not in increasing the powers of the State, but in resorting to free organization and free federation in all those branches which are now considered as attributes of the State.\u2014\u200a\nPatriotism.\nRob Sparrow outlined four main reasons why anarcho-communists oppose patriotism:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17867", "revid": "37666339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17867", "title": "London", "text": "Capital of both England and the United Kingdom\nLondon is the capital and largest city of both England and the United Kingdom, with a population of million people in 2024. Its wider metropolitan area is the largest in Western Europe, with a population of 15.1\u00a0million. London stands on the River Thames in southeast England, at the head of a tidal estuary down to the North Sea, and has been a major settlement for nearly 2,000\u00a0years. Its ancient core and financial centre, the City of London, was founded by the Romans as Londinium and has retained its medieval boundaries. The City of Westminster, to the west of the City of London, has been the centuries-long host of the national government and parliament. London grew rapidly in the 19th century, becoming the world's largest city at the time. Since the 19th century the name \"London\" has referred to the metropolis around the City of London, historically split between the counties of Middlesex, Essex, Surrey, Kent and Hertfordshire, which since 1965 has largely comprised the administrative area of Greater London, governed by 33 local authorities and the Greater London Authority.\nAs one of the world's major global cities, London exerts a strong influence on world art, entertainment, fashion, commerce, finance, education, healthcare, media, science, technology, tourism, transport and communications. London is Europe's largest city economy and one of the world's major financial centres. London hosts Europe's largest concentration of higher education institutions, comprising over 50 universities and colleges and enrolling more than 500,000 students as at 2023. It is home to several of the world's leading academic institutions: Imperial College London, internationally recognised for its excellence in natural and applied sciences, and University College London (UCL), a comprehensive research-intensive university, consistently rank among the top ten globally. Other notable institutions include King's College London (KCL), highly regarded in law, humanities and health sciences; the London School of Economics (LSE), globally prominent in social sciences and economics; and specialised institutions such as the Royal College of Art (RCA), Royal Academy of Music (RAM), the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS) and London Business School (LBS). It is the most-visited city in Europe and has the world's busiest city airport system. The London Underground is the world's oldest rapid transit system.\nLondon's diverse cultures encompass over 300 languages. The 2025 population of Greater London of just over 9.8\u00a0million made it Europe's third-most populous city, accounting for 13.1\u00a0per\u00a0cent of the United Kingdom's population and 15.5 per cent of England's population. The Greater London Built-up Area is the fourth-most populous in Europe, with about 9.8\u00a0million inhabitants as of 2011. The London metropolitan area is the third-most-populous in Europe, with about 15\u00a0million inhabitants as of 2025, making London a megacity.\nFour World Heritage Sites are located in London: Kew Gardens; the Tower of London; the site featuring the Palace of Westminster, the Church of St Margaret, and Westminster Abbey; and the historic settlement in Greenwich where the Royal Observatory defines the prime meridian (0\u00b0 longitude) and Greenwich Mean Time. Other landmarks include Buckingham Palace, the London Eye, Piccadilly Circus, St Paul's Cathedral, Tower Bridge and Trafalgar Square. The city has the most museums, art galleries, libraries and cultural venues in the UK, including the British Museum, the National Gallery, the Natural History Museum, Tate Modern, the British Library and numerous West End theatres. Important sporting events held in London include the FA Cup Final, the Wimbledon Tennis Championships and the London Marathon. It became the first city to host three Summer Olympic Games upon hosting the 2012 Summer Olympics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\n\"London\" is an ancient name, attested in the first century AD, usually in the Latinised form . Modern scientific analyses of the name must account for the origins of the different forms that are found in early sources: Latin (usually ), Old English (usually ), and Welsh (usually ), with reference to the known developments over time of sounds in those different languages. It is agreed that the name came into these languages from Common Brythonic; recent work tends to reconstruct the lost Celtic form of the name as or something similar. This was then adapted into Latin as and borrowed into Old English.\nUntil 1889, the name \"London\" applied officially only to the City of London, but since then it has also referred to the County of London and to Greater London.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nIn 1993 remains of a Bronze Age bridge were found on the south River Thames foreshore, upstream from Vauxhall Bridge. Two of the timbers were radiocarbon dated to 1750\u20131285\u00a0BC. In 2010 foundations of a large timber structure, dated to 4800\u20134500\u00a0BC, were found on the Thames' south foreshore downstream from Vauxhall Bridge. Both structures are on the south bank of the Thames, where the now-underground River Effra flows into the Thames.\nRoman London.\nDespite the evidence of scattered Brythonic settlements in the area, the first major settlement was founded by the Romans around AD\u00a047, about 4\u00a0years after their invasion of AD\u00a043. This only lasted until about AD\u00a061, when the Iceni tribe led by Queen Boudica stormed it and burnt it to the ground.\nThe next planned incarnation of Londinium prospered, superseding Colchester as the principal city of the Roman province of Britannia in 100. At its height in the 2nd century, Roman London had a population of about 60,000.\nAnglo-Saxon and Viking-period London.\nWith the early-5th-century collapse of Roman rule, the walled city of Londinium was effectively abandoned, although Roman civilisation continued around St Martin-in-the-Fields until about 450. From about 500 an Anglo-Saxon settlement known as Lundenwic developed slightly west of the old Roman city. By about 680 the city had become a major port again, but there is little evidence of large-scale production. From the 820s repeated Viking assaults brought decline. Three are recorded; those in 851 and 886 succeeded, while the last, in 994, was rebuffed.\nThe Vikings applied Danelaw over much of eastern and northern England, its boundary running roughly from London to Chester as an area of political and geographical control imposed by the Viking incursions formally agreed by the Danish warlord named Guthrum and the West Saxon king Alfred the Great in 886. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" records that Alfred \"refounded\" London in 886. Archaeological research shows this involved abandonment of Lundenwic and a revival of life and trade within the old Roman walls. London then grew slowly until a dramatic increase in about 950.\nBy the 11th century London was clearly the largest town in England. Westminster Abbey, rebuilt in Romanesque style by King Edward the Confessor, was one of the grandest churches in Europe. Winchester had been the capital of Anglo-Saxon England, but from this time London became the main forum for foreign traders and the base for defence in time of war. In the view of Frank Stenton: \"It had the resources, and it was rapidly developing the dignity and the political self-consciousness appropriate to a national capital.\"\nMiddle Ages.\nAfter winning the Battle of Hastings, William, Duke of Normandy, was crowned King of England as William I in the newly completed Westminster Abbey on Christmas Day 1066. William built the Tower of London, the first of many such in England rebuilt in stone in the south-eastern corner of the city, to intimidate the inhabitants. In 1097 William II began building Westminster Hall, near the abbey. It became the basis of a new Palace of Westminster.\nIn the 12th century the institutions of central government, which had hitherto followed the royal English court around the country, grew in size and sophistication and became increasingly fixed, for most purposes at Westminster, although the royal treasury came to rest in the Tower of London. While the City of Westminster developed into a true governmental capital, its distinct neighbour, the City of London, remained England's largest city and principal commercial centre and flourished under its own unique administration, the Corporation of London. In 1100 its population was some 18,000; by 1300 it had grown to nearly 100,000. With the Black Death in the mid-14th century, London lost nearly a third of its population. London was the focus of the Peasants' Revolt in 1381.\nLondon was a centre of England's Jewish population before their expulsion by Edward I in 1290. Violence against Jews occurred in 1190, when it was rumoured that the new king had ordered their massacre after they had presented themselves at his coronation. In 1264, during the Second Barons' War, Simon de Montfort's rebels killed 500 Jews while attempting to seize records of debts.\nEarly modern.\nDuring the Tudor period the Reformation produced a gradual shift to Protestantism. Much property in London passed from church to private ownership, which accelerated trade and business in the city. In 1475 the Hanseatic League set up a main trading base (\"kontor\") of England in London, called the \"Stalhof\" or \"Steelyard\". It remained until 1853, when the Hanseatic cities of L\u00fcbeck, Bremen and Hamburg sold the property to South Eastern Railway. Woollen cloth was shipped undyed and undressed from 14th- and 15th-century London to the nearby shores of the Low Countries.\nYet English maritime enterprise hardly reached beyond the seas of northwestern Europe. The commercial route to the Italian peninsula and the Mediterranean Sea was normally through Antwerp and over the Alps; any ships passing through the Strait of Gibraltar to or from England were likely to be Italian or Ragusan. The reopening of the Netherlands to English shipping in January 1565 spurred a burst of commercial activity. The Royal Exchange was founded. Mercantilism grew and monopoly traders such as the East India Company were founded as trade expanded to the New World. London became the main North Sea port, with migrants arriving from England and abroad. The population rose from about 50,000 in 1530 to about 225,000 in 1605.\nIn the 16th century the poet and playwright William Shakespeare and his contemporaries lived in London during English Renaissance theatre. Shakespeare's Globe Theatre was constructed in 1599 in Southwark. Stage performances came to a halt in London when Puritan authorities shut down the theatres in the 1640s. The ban on theatre was lifted during the Restoration in 1660, and London's oldest operating theatre, Drury Lane, opened in 1663 in what is now the West End theatre district.\nBy the end of the Tudor period in 1603, London was still compact. There was an assassination attempt on James I in Westminster, in the Gunpowder Plot of 5 November 1605. In 1637 the government of Charles I attempted to reform administration in the London area. This called for the Corporation of the city to extend its jurisdiction and administration over expanding areas around the city. Fearing an attempt by the Crown to diminish the Liberties of London, coupled with a lack of interest in administering these additional areas or concern by city guilds of having to share power, caused the Corporation's \"The Great Refusal\", a decision which largely continues to account for the unique governmental status of the City of London.\nIn the English Civil War the majority of Londoners supported the Parliamentary cause. After an initial advance by the Royalists in 1642, culminating in the battles of Brentford and Turnham Green, London was surrounded by a defensive perimeter wall known as the Lines of Communication. The lines were built by up to 20,000 people, and were completed in under two months. The fortifications failed their only test when the New Model Army entered London in 1647, and they were levelled by Parliament the same year. London was plagued by disease in the early-17th century, culminating in the Great Plague of 1665\u20131666, which killed up to 100,000 people, or a fifth of the population. The Great Fire of London broke out in 1666 in Pudding Lane in the city and quickly swept through the wooden buildings. Rebuilding took over 10\u00a0years and was supervised by the polymath Robert Hooke.\nIn 1710 Christopher Wren's masterpiece St Paul's Cathedral was completed, replacing its medieval predecessor, which burnt down in the Great Fire. The dome of St Paul's dominated the London skyline for centuries, inspiring the artworks and writing of William Blake, with his 1789 poem \"Holy Thursday\" referring to 'the high dome of Pauls'. During the Georgian era new districts such as Mayfair were formed in the west; new bridges over the Thames encouraged development in South London. In the east the Port of London expanded downstream. London's development as an international financial centre matured for much of the 18th century.\nIn 1762 George III acquired Buckingham House, which was enlarged over the next 75\u00a0years. During the 18th century London was said to be dogged by crime, and the Bow Street Runners were established in 1750 as a professional police force. Epidemics during the 1720s and 30s saw most children born in the city die before reaching their fifth birthday.\nCoffeehouses became a popular place to debate ideas, as growing literacy and development of the printing press made news widely available, with Fleet Street becoming the centre of the British press. The invasion of Amsterdam by armies of Napoleon led many financiers to relocate to London and the first London international issue was arranged in 1817. Around the same time, the Royal Navy became the world's leading war fleet, acting as a major deterrent to potential economic adversaries. Following a fire in 1838, the Royal Exchange was redesigned by William Tite and rebuilt in 1844. The repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 was specifically aimed at weakening Dutch economic power. London then overtook Amsterdam as the leading international financial centre.\nLate modern and contemporary.\nWith the onset of the Industrial Revolution in Britain, an unprecedented growth in urbanisation took place, and the number of High Streets (the primary street for retail in Britain) rapidly grew. London was the world's largest city from about 1831 to 1925, with a population density of 802 per acre (325 per hectare). In addition to the growing number of stores selling goods, such as Harding, Howell &amp; Co., one of the first department stores, located on Pall Mall, the streets had scores of street sellers. Rising traffic congestion led to the creation of the London Underground, the world's first urban rail network.\nLondon's overcrowded conditions and the \"Great Stink\" of the River Thames led to cholera epidemics, claiming 14,000 lives in 1848, and 6,000 in 1866. A key development in public health and sanitation took place at the Great Exhibition of 1851 at Hyde Park when George Jennings installed the first public flush toilets. In response to the exacerbation of sanitary conditions brought on by heavy industrialisation and urbanisation, the modern sewage system was created in London by the Metropolitan Board of Works led by its chief engineer Joseph Bazalgette. The London sewer system included of main and of street sewers that diverted waste to the Thames Estuary, and by the 1890s it would also feature the revolutionary biological treatment of sewage to oxidise the waste. The Metropolitan Board of Works oversaw infrastructure expansion in the capital and some surrounding counties; it was abolished in 1889 when the London County Council was created out of county areas surrounding the capital.\nFrom the early 20th century onwards, teashops were found on High Streets across London and the rest of Britain, with Lyons, who opened the first of their chain of teashops in Piccadilly in 1894, leading the way. Tearooms, such as the Criterion in Piccadilly, became a popular meeting place for women from the suffrage movement. The city was the target of many attacks during the suffragette bombing and arson campaign, between 1912 and 1914, in which historic landmarks such as Westminster Abbey and St Paul's Cathedral were bombed.\nLondon was bombed by the Germans in the First World War, and during the Second World War, the Blitz and other bombings by the \"Luftwaffe\" of Nazi Germany killed over 30,000 Londoners, destroying large tracts of housing and other buildings across the city. The tomb of the Unknown Warrior, an unidentified member of the British armed forces killed during the First World War, was buried in Westminster Abbey on 11 November 1920. The Cenotaph, located in Whitehall, was unveiled on the same day, and is the focal point for the National Service of Remembrance held annually on Remembrance Sunday, the closest Sunday to 11 November.\nThe 1948 Summer Olympics were held at the original Wembley Stadium, while London was still recovering from the war. From the 1940s, London became home to many immigrants, primarily from Commonwealth countries such as Jamaica, India, Bangladesh and Pakistan, making London one of the most multiracial cities in the world. In 1951 the Festival of Britain was held on the South Bank. The Great Smog of 1952 led to the Clean Air Act 1956, which ended the \"pea soup fogs\" for which London had been notorious, and had earned it the nickname the \"Big Smoke\".\nStarting mainly in the mid-1960s, London became a centre for worldwide youth culture, exemplified by the Swinging London sub-culture associated with the King's Road, Chelsea and Carnaby Street. The role of trendsetter revived in the punk era. In 1965 London's political boundaries were expanded in response to the growth of the urban area, and a new Greater London Council was created. During the Troubles in Northern Ireland, London was hit from 1973 by bomb attacks by the Provisional Irish Republican Army. These attacks lasted for two decades, starting with the Old Bailey bombing. Racial inequality was highlighted by the 1981 Brixton riot.\nGreater London's population declined in the decades after the Second World War, from an estimated peak of 8.6\u00a0million in 1939 to around 6.8\u00a0million in the 1980s. The principal ports for London moved downstream to Felixstowe and Tilbury, with the London Docklands area becoming a focus for regeneration, including the Canary Wharf development. This was born out of London's increasing role as an international financial centre in the 1980s. Located about 2\u00a0miles (3\u00a0km) east of central London, the Thames Barrier was completed in the 1980s to protect London against tidal surges from the North Sea.\nThe Greater London Council was abolished in 1986, leaving London with no central administration until 2000 and the creation of the Greater London Authority. To mark the 21st century the Millennium Dome, the London Eye and the Millennium Bridge were constructed. On 6 July 2005 London was awarded the 2012 Summer Olympics, as the first city to stage the Olympic Games three times. On 7 July 2005 three London Underground trains and a double-decker bus were bombed in a series of terrorist attacks.\nIn 2008 \"Time\" magazine named London alongside New York City and Hong Kong as Nylonkong, hailing them as the world's three most influential global cities. In January 2015 Greater London's population was estimated to be 8.63\u00a0million, its highest since 1939. During the Brexit referendum in 2016, the UK as a whole decided to leave the European Union, but most London constituencies voted for remaining. However, Britain's exit from the EU in January 2020 only marginally weakened London's position as an international financial centre.\nIn terms of international connectedness, as of 2024, London was one of two cities worldwide classified as an \"Alpha++\" city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.\nAdministration.\nLocal government.\nThe administration of London is formed of two tiers: a citywide, strategic tier and a local tier. Citywide administration is coordinated by the Greater London Authority (GLA), while local administration is carried out by 33 smaller authorities. The GLA consists of two elected components: the mayor of London, who has executive powers, and the London Assembly, which scrutinises the mayor's decisions and can accept or reject the mayor's budget proposals each year. The GLA has responsibility for the majority of London's transport system through its functional arm Transport for London (TfL), it is responsible for overseeing the city's police and fire services, and also for setting a strategic vision for London on a range of issues. The headquarters of the GLA is City Hall, Newham. The mayor since 2016 has been Sadiq Khan, the first Muslim mayor of a major Western capital. The mayor's statutory planning strategy is published as the London Plan, which was most recently revised in 2011.\nThe local authorities are the councils of the 32 London boroughs, and the City of London Corporation. They are responsible for most local services, such as local planning, schools, libraries, leisure and recreation, social services, local roads and refuse collection. Certain functions, such as waste management, are provided through joint arrangements. In 2009\u20132010 the combined revenue expenditure by London councils and the GLA amounted to just over \u00a322\u00a0billion (\u00a314.7\u00a0billion for the boroughs and \u00a37.4\u00a0billion for the GLA). Although Greater London is almost entirely unparished, there is one parish council; Queen's Park Community Council, which forms a third tier of local government in its area.\nThe London Fire Brigade is the statutory fire and rescue service for Greater London, run by the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority. It is the third largest fire service in the world. National Health Service ambulance services are provided by the London Ambulance Service (LAS) NHS Trust, the largest free-at-the-point-of-use emergency ambulance service in the world. The London Air Ambulance charity operates in conjunction with the LAS where required. His Majesty's Coastguard and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution operate on the River Thames, which is under the jurisdiction of the Port of London Authority from Teddington Lock to the sea.\nNational government.\nLondon is the seat of the Government of the United Kingdom. Many government departments, as well as the prime minister's residence at 10 Downing Street, are based close to the Palace of Westminster, particularly along Whitehall. There are 75 members of Parliament (MPs) from London; As at June 2024, 59 are from the Labour Party, 9 are Conservatives, 6 are Liberal Democrats and one constituency is held by an independent. The ministerial post of Minister for London was created in 1994; however, it has been vacant since July 2024.\nPolicing and crime.\nPolicing in Greater London, with the exception of the City of London, is provided by the Metropolitan Police (\"The Met\"), overseen by the mayor through the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (MOPAC). The Met is also referred to as Scotland Yard after the location of its original headquarters in a road called Great Scotland Yard in Whitehall. The City of London has its own police force\u00a0\u2013 the City of London Police. First worn by Met police officers in 1863, the custodian helmet has been called a \"cultural icon\" and a \"symbol of British law enforcement\". Introduced by the Met in 1929, the blue police telephone box (the basis for the TARDIS in the television series \"Doctor Who\") was once a common sight throughout London and regional cities in the UK.\nThe British Transport Police are responsible for police services on National Rail, London Underground, Docklands Light Railway and Tramlink services.\nThe Ministry of Defence Police is a special police force in London, which does not generally become involved with policing the general public. The UK's domestic counterintelligence service, MI5, is headquartered in Thames House on the north bank of the River Thames and the foreign intelligence service, MI6, is headquartered in the SIS Building on the south bank.\nCrime rates vary widely across different areas of London. Crime figures are made available nationally at Local Authority and Ward level. In 2015 there were 118 homicides, a 25.5 per cent increase over 2014.\nRecorded crime has been rising in London, notably violent crime and murder by stabbing and other means have risen. There were 50 murders from the start of 2018 to mid April 2018. Funding cuts to police in London are likely to have contributed to this, though other factors are involved. However, homicide figures fell in 2022 with 109 recorded for the year, and the murder rate in London is much lower than other major cities around the world.\nGeography.\nScope.\nLondon, also known as Greater London, is one of nine regions of England and the top subdivision covering most of the city's metropolis. The City of London at its core once comprised the whole settlement, but as its urban area grew, the Corporation of London resisted attempts to amalgamate the city with its suburbs, causing \"London\" to be defined several ways.\nForty percent of Greater London is covered by the London post town, in which 'London' forms part of postal addresses. The London telephone area code (020) covers a larger area, similar in size to Greater London, although some outer districts are excluded and some just outside included. The Greater London boundary has been aligned to the M25 motorway in places.\nFurther urban expansion is now prevented by the Metropolitan Green Belt, although the built-up area extends beyond the boundary in places, producing a separately defined Greater London Urban Area. Beyond this is the vast London commuter belt. Greater London is split for some purposes into Inner London and Outer London, and by the River Thames into North and South, with an informal Central London area. The coordinates of the nominal \"centre of London\", traditionally the original Eleanor Cross at Charing Cross near the junction of Trafalgar Square and Whitehall, are about .\nStatus.\nWithin London, both the City of London and the City of Westminster have city status. The City of London and the remainder of Greater London are both counties for the purposes of lieutenancies. The area of Greater London includes areas that are part of the historic counties of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, Essex and Hertfordshire. More recently, Greater London has been defined as a region of England and in this context is known as \"London\".\nIt is the capital of the United Kingdom and of England by convention rather than statute. The capital of England was moved to London from Winchester as the Palace of Westminster developed in the 12th and 13th centuries to become the permanent location of the royal court, and thus the political capital of the nation.\nTopography.\nGreater London encompasses a total area of . The extended area known as the London Metropolitan Region or the London Metropolitan Agglomeration, comprises a total area of .\nModern London stands on the Thames, its primary geographical feature, a navigable river which crosses the city from the south-west to the east. The Thames Valley is a flood plain surrounded by gently rolling hills including Parliament Hill, Addington Hills, and Primrose Hill. Historically London grew up at the lowest bridging point on the Thames. The Thames was once a much broader, shallower river with extensive marshlands; at high tide, its shores reached five times their present width.\nSince the Victorian era the Thames has been extensively embanked, and many of its London tributaries now flow underground. The Thames is a tidal river, and London is vulnerable to flooding. The threat has increased over time because of a slow but continuous rise in high water level caused by climate change and by the slow 'tilting' of the British Isles as a result of post-glacial rebound.\nClimate.\nLondon has a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"). Rainfall records have been kept in the city since at least 1697, when records began at Kew. At Kew, the most rainfall in one month is in November 1755 and the least is in both December 1788 and July 1800. Mile End also had in April 1893. The wettest year on record is 1903, with a total fall of and the driest is 1921, with a total fall of . The average annual precipitation amounts to about 600mm, which is half the annual rainfall of New York City. Despite relatively low annual precipitation, London receives 109.6 rainy days on the 1.0mm threshold annually. London is vulnerable to climate change, and there is concern among hydrological experts that households may run out of water before 2050.\nTemperature extremes in London range from at Heathrow on 19 July 2022 down to at Northolt on 13 December 1981. Records for atmospheric pressure have been kept at London since 1692. The highest pressure ever reported is on 20 January 2020.\nSummers are generally warm, sometimes hot. London's average July high is 23.5\u00a0\u00b0C (74.3\u00a0\u00b0F). On average each year, London experiences 31 days above and 4.2 days above . During the 2003 European heat wave, prolonged heat led to hundreds of heat-related deaths. A previous spell of 15 consecutive days above in England in 1976 also caused many heat related deaths. A previous temperature of in August 1911 at the Greenwich station was later disregarded as non-standard. Droughts can also, occasionally, be a problem, especially in summer, most recently in summer 2018, and with much drier than average conditions prevailing from May to December. However, the most consecutive days without rain was 73 days in the spring of 1893.\nWinters are generally cool with little temperature variation. Heavy snow is rare but snow usually falls at least once each winter. Spring and autumn can be pleasant. As a large city, London has a considerable urban heat island effect, making the centre of London at times warmer than the suburbs and outskirts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAreas.\nPlaces within London's vast urban area are identified using area names, such as Mayfair, Southwark, Wembley and Whitechapel. These are either informal designations, reflect the names of villages that have been absorbed by sprawl, or are superseded administrative units such as parishes or former boroughs.\nSuch names have remained in use through tradition, each referring to a local area with its own distinctive character, but without official boundaries. Since 1965, Greater London has been divided into 32 London boroughs in addition to its once walled ancient core, the City of London. The City of London is the main financial district, and Canary Wharf has recently developed into a new financial and commercial hub in the Docklands to the east.\nWest London is located west of the City of London. The West End of London is a prestigious area of inner West London focused on parts of Westminster close to the City of London. The West End includes London\u2019s main shopping and entertainment areas, including West End theatre, and as such attracts many tourists. West London includes expensive residential areas where properties can sell for tens of millions of pounds. The average price for properties in Kensington and Chelsea is over \u00a32 million.\nEast London is located to the east of the City of London, with the East End being the part of East London closest to the City of London. It has long been known for its high immigrant population and for being one of the poorest areas of the capital. East London included the main northern part of the Port of London and extensive industrial areas. In the late 20th century, deindustrialisation and the closure of the docks brought great hardship. Throughout the area many large brownfield areas now being redeveloped including London Riverside and the Lower Lea Valley, which was developed into the Olympic Park for the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics.\nNorth London is situated north of the City of London, with South London (whose development started with the ancient borough of Southwark at the southern end of London Bridge) occupies all of London south of the River Thames.\nArchitecture.\nLondon's buildings are too diverse to be characterised by any particular architectural style, partly because of their varying ages. Many grand houses and public buildings, such as the National Gallery, are constructed from Portland stone. Some areas of the city, particularly those just west of the centre, are characterised by white stucco or whitewashed buildings. Few structures in central London pre-date the Great Fire of 1666, these being a few trace Roman remains, the Tower of London and a few scattered Tudor survivors in the city. Further out is, for example, the Tudor-period Hampton Court Palace.\nPart of the varied architectural heritage are the 17th-century churches by Christopher Wren, neoclassical financial institutions such as the Royal Exchange and the Bank of England, to the early-20th-century Old Bailey courthouse and the 1960s Barbican Estate. The 1939 Battersea Power Station by the river in the south-west is a local landmark, while some railway termini are excellent examples of Victorian architecture, most notably St. Pancras and Paddington. The density of London varies, with high employment density in the central area and Canary Wharf, high residential densities in inner London, and lower densities in Outer London.\nThe Monument to the Great Fire of London in the City of London provides views of the surrounding area while commemorating the Great Fire of London, which originated nearby. Marble Arch and Wellington Arch, at the north and south ends of Park Lane, have royal connections, as do the Albert Memorial and Royal Albert Hall in Kensington. Nelson's Column (built to commemorate Admiral Horatio Nelson who is depicted in a statue at the top) is a nationally recognised monument in Trafalgar Square, one of the focal points of Central London. Older buildings are mainly brick, commonly the yellow London stock brick.\nIn the dense areas, most of the concentration is via medium- and high-rise buildings. London's skyscrapers, such as 30 St Mary Axe (designed by Foster and Partners and dubbed \"The Gherkin\"), Tower 42, the Broadgate Tower and One Canada Square, are mostly in the two financial districts, the City of London and Canary Wharf. High-rise development is restricted at certain sites if it would obstruct protected views of St Paul's Cathedral and other historic buildings. This protective policy, known as 'St Paul's Heights', has been in operation by the City of London since 1937. Nevertheless, there are a number of tall skyscrapers in Central London, including the 95-storey Shard London Bridge, the tallest building in the UK and Western Europe.\nOther notable modern buildings include The Scalpel, 20 Fenchurch Street (dubbed 'The Walkie-Talkie'), the former City Hall in Southwark, the Art Deco BBC Broadcasting House plus the Postmodernist British Library in Somers Town/Kings Cross and No 1 Poultry by James Stirling. The BT Tower stands at and has a 360-degree coloured LED screen near the top. What was formerly the Millennium Dome, by the Thames to the east of Canary Wharf, is now an entertainment venue called the O2 Arena.\nNatural history.\nThe London Natural History Society suggests that London is \"one of the World's Greenest Cities\" with more than 40% green space or open water. They indicate that 2000 species of flowering plant have been found growing there and that the tidal Thames supports 120 species of fish. They state that over 60 species of bird nest in central London and that their members have recorded 47 species of butterfly, 1,173 moths and more than 270 kinds of spider around London. London's wetland areas support nationally important populations of many water birds. In 2024 there was an estimated 3 million pigeons in London. At least six ravens are kept at the Tower of London at all times. London has 38 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), two national nature reserves and 76 local nature reserves.\nAmphibians are common in the capital, including smooth newts living by the Tate Modern, and common frogs, common toads, palmate newts, and great crested newts. On the other hand, native reptiles such as slowworms, common lizards, barred grass snakes and adders, are mostly only seen in Outer London.\nAmong other inhabitants of London are 10,000 red foxes, so that there are now 16 foxes for every square mile (6 per square km) of London. Other mammals found in Greater London are hedgehog, brown rat, mice, rabbit, shrew, vole and grey squirrel. In wilder areas of Outer London, such as Epping Forest, a wide variety of mammals are found, including European hare, badger, field, bank and water vole, wood mouse, yellow-necked mouse, mole, shrew and weasel, in addition to red fox, grey squirrel and hedgehog. A dead otter was found at The Highway, in Wapping, about 1\u00a0mile (1.6\u00a0km) from the Tower Bridge, which would suggest that they have begun to move back after being absent a hundred years from the city. Ten of England's eighteen species of bats have been recorded in Epping Forest: soprano, Nathusius' and common pipistrelles, common noctule, serotine, barbastelle, Daubenton's, brown long-eared, Natterer's and Leisler's.\nHerds of red and fallow deer roam freely within much of Richmond and Bushy Park. A cull takes place each November and February to ensure numbers can be sustained. Epping Forest is also known for its fallow deer, which can frequently be seen in herds to the north of the Forest. A rare population of melanistic, black fallow deer is also maintained at the Deer Sanctuary near Theydon Bois. Muntjac deer are also found in the forest. While Londoners are accustomed to wildlife such as birds and foxes sharing the city, more recently urban deer have started becoming a regular feature, and whole herds of fallow deer come into residential areas at night to take advantage of London's green spaces.\nDemographics.\nLondon's continuous urban area extends beyond Greater London and numbered 9,787,426 people in 2011, while its wider metropolitan area had a population of 15.1 million in 2025. A net 726,000\u00a0immigrants arrived there in the period 1991\u20132001.\nThe region covers , giving a population density of more than ten times that of any other British region. In population terms, London is the 19th largest city and the 18th largest metropolitan region.\nIn tenure, 23.1% socially rent within London, 46.8% either own their house outright or with a mortgage or loan and 30% privately rent at the 2021 census. Many Londoners work from home; 42.9% did so at the 2021 census, while 20.6% drove a car to work. The biggest decrease in method of transportation was seen within those who take the train and underground, declining from 22.6% in 2011 to 9.6% in 2021. In qualifications, 46.7% of London had census classified Level 4 qualifications or higher, which is predominately university degrees. 16.2% had no qualifications at all.\nAge structure and median age.\nLondon's median age is one of the youngest regions in the UK. It was recorded in 2018 that London's residents were 36.5\u00a0years old, which was younger than the UK median of 40.3.\nChildren younger than 14 constituted 20.6% of the population in Outer London in 2018, and 18% in Inner London. The 15\u201324 age group was 11.1% in Outer and 10.2% in Inner London, those aged 25\u201344\u00a0years 30.6% in Outer London and 39.7% in Inner London, those aged 45\u201364\u00a0years 24% and 20.7% in Outer and Inner London respectively. Those aged 65 and over are 13.6% in Outer London, but only 9.3% in Inner London.\nCountry of birth.\nThe 2021 census recorded that 3,575,739 people (40.6%) of London's population were foreign-born, making it among the cities with the largest immigrant population in terms of absolute numbers and a growth of roughly 3 million since 1971 when the foreign born population was 668,373. 13% of the total population were Asian born (32.1% of the total foreign born population), 7.1% are African born (17.5%), 15.5% are Other European born (38.2%), and 4.2% were born in the Americas and Caribbean (10.3%). The 5 largest single countries of origin were respectively India, Romania, Poland, Bangladesh and Pakistan.\nAbout 56.8 per cent of children born in London in 2021 were born to a mother who was born abroad. This trend has been increasing in the past two decades when foreign born mothers made up 43.3% of births in 2001 in London, becoming the majority in the middle of the 2000s by 2006, comprising 52.5%.\nA large degree of the foreign born population who were present at the 2021 census had arrived relatively recently. Of the total population, those that arrived between the years of 2011 and 2021 account for 16.6% of London. Those who arrived between 2001 and 2010 are 10.4%, between 1991 and 2001, 5.7%, and prior to 1990, 7.3%.\nEthnic groups.\nAccording to the Office for National Statistics, based on the 2021 census, 53.8% of the 8,173,941 inhabitants of London were White, with 36.8% White British, 1.8% White Irish, 0.1% Gypsy or Irish Traveller, 0.4% Roma and 14.7% classified as Other White. Meanwhile, 22.2% of Londoners were of Asian or mixed-Asian descent, with 20.8% being of full Asian descent and 1.4% being of mixed-Asian heritage. Indians accounted for 7.5% of the population, followed by Bangladeshis and Pakistanis at 3.7% and 3.3% respectively. Chinese people accounted for 1.7%, and Arabs for 1.6%. A further 4.6% were classified as \"Other Asian.\" 15.9% of London's population were of Black or mixed-Black descent. 13.5% were of full Black descent, with persons of mixed-Black heritage comprising 2.4%. Black Africans accounted for 7.9% of London's population; 3.9% identified as Black Caribbean, and 1.7% as \"Other Black.\" 5.7% were of mixed race. This ethnic structure has changed considerably since the 1960s. Estimates for 1961 put the total non-White ethnic minority population at 179,109 comprising 2.3% of the population at the time, having risen since then to 1,346,119 and 20.2% in 1991 and 4,068,553 and 46.2% in 2021. Of those of a White British background, estimates for 1971 put the population at 6,500,000 and 87% of the total population, which fell to 3,239,281 and 36.8% in 2021.\nAs of 2021 the majority of London's school pupils come from ethnic minority backgrounds. 23.9% were White British, 14% Other White, 23.2% Asian, 17.9% Black, 11.3% Mixed, 6.3% Other and 2.3% unclassified. Altogether at the 2021 census, of London's 1,695,741 population aged 0 to 15, 42% were White in total, splitting it down into 30.9% who were White British, 0.5% Irish, 10.6% Other White, 23% Asian, 16.4% Black, 12% Mixed and 6.6% another ethnic group.\nLanguages.\nIn January 2005, a survey of London's ethnic and religious diversity claimed that more than 300 languages were spoken in London and more than 50 non-indigenous communities had populations of more than 10,000. At the 2021 census, 78.4% of Londoners spoke English as their first language. The 5 biggest languages outside English were Romanian, Spanish, Polish, Bengali and Portuguese. French is said to be the 6th language spoken in London, with the city home for between 300,000 to 400,000 people from France.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2021 Census, the largest religious groupings were Christians (40.66%), followed by those of no religion (20.7%), Muslims (15%), no response (8.5%), Hindus (5.15%), Jews (1.65%), Sikhs (1.64%), Buddhists (1.0%) and other (0.8%).\nLondon has traditionally been Christian, and has a large number of churches, particularly in the City of London. The well-known St Paul's Cathedral in the City and Southwark Cathedral south of the river are Anglican administrative centres, while the Archbishop of Canterbury, principal bishop of the Church of England and worldwide Anglican Communion, has their main residence at Lambeth Palace in the London Borough of Lambeth.\nImportant national and royal ceremonies are shared between St Paul's and Westminster Abbey. The Abbey is not to be confused with nearby Westminster Cathedral, the largest Roman Catholic cathedral in England and Wales. Despite the prevalence of Anglican churches, observance is low within the denomination. Anglican Church attendance continues a long, steady decline, according to Church of England statistics.\nNotable mosques include the East London Mosque in Tower Hamlets, which is allowed to give the Islamic call to prayer through loudspeakers, the London Central Mosque on the edge of Regent's Park and the Baitul Futuh of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. After the oil boom, increasing numbers of wealthy Middle-Eastern Arab Muslims based themselves around Mayfair, Kensington and Knightsbridge in West London. There are large Bengali Muslim communities in the eastern boroughs of Tower Hamlets and Newham.\nLarge Hindu communities are found in the north-western boroughs of Harrow and Brent, the latter hosting what was until 2006 Europe's largest Hindu temple, Neasden Temple. London is home to 44 Hindu temples, including the BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir London. There are Sikh communities in East and West London, particularly in Southall, home to one of the largest Sikh populations and the largest Sikh temple outside India.\nThe majority of British Jews live in London, with notable Jewish communities in Stamford Hill, Stanmore, Golders Green, Finchley, Hampstead, Hendon and Edgware, all in North London. Opened in 1701, Bevis Marks Synagogue in the City of London is affiliated to London's historic Sephardic Jewish community. It is the oldest continually active synagogue in Europe having held regular services for over 300 years. Stanmore and Canons Park Synagogue has the largest membership of any Orthodox synagogue in Europe. The London Jewish Forum was set up in 2006 in response to the growing significance of devolved London Government.\nAccents.\nCockney is an accent heard across London, mainly spoken by working-class and lower-middle-class Londoners. It is mainly attributed to the East End and wider East London, having originated there in the 18th century, although it has been suggested that the Cockney style of speech is much older. Some features of Cockney include \"Th\"-fronting (pronouncing \"th\" as \"f\"), \"th\" inside a word is pronounced with a \"v\", \"H\"-dropping, and, like most English accents, a Cockney accent drops the \"r\" after a vowel. John Camden Hotten, in his \"A Dictionary of Modern Slang, Cant, and Vulgar Words\" of 1859, makes reference to Cockney \"use of a peculiar slang language\" (Cockney rhyming slang) when describing the costermongers of the East End. Since the start of the 21st century the extreme form of the Cockney dialect is less common in parts of the East End itself, with modern strongholds including other parts of London and suburbs in the home counties. This is particularly pronounced in areas like Romford (in the London Borough of Havering) and Southend (in Essex), which have received significant inflows of older East End residents in recent decades.\nEstuary English is an intermediate accent between Cockney and Received Pronunciation. It is widely spoken by people of all classes.\nMulticultural London English (MLE) is a multiethnolect becoming increasingly common in multicultural areas amongst young, working-class people from diverse backgrounds. It is a fusion of an array of ethnic accents, in particular Afro-Caribbean and South Asian, with a significant Cockney influence.\nReceived Pronunciation (RP) is the accent traditionally regarded as the standard for British English. It has no specific geographical correlate, although it is also traditionally defined as the standard speech used in London and south-eastern England. It is mainly spoken by upper-class and upper-middle class Londoners. Standard Southern British English (SSBE) has been considered as an evolution of RP that is now common and widely spoken in London and the south-east of England by a wide variety of people, but is distinct from Estuary English and MLE.\nEconomy.\nLondon's gross regional product in 2019 was \u00a3503\u00a0billion, around a quarter of UK GDP. London has five major business districts: the City, Westminster, Canary Wharf, Camden &amp; Islington, and Lambeth &amp; Southwark. One way to get an idea of their relative importance is to look at relative amounts of office space: Greater London had 27\u00a0million\u00a0m2 of office space in 2001, and the City contains the most space, with 8\u00a0million\u00a0m2 of office space. London has some of the highest real estate prices in the world.\nCity of London.\nLondon's finance industry is based in the City of London and Canary Wharf, the two major business districts. London took over as a major financial centre shortly after 1795 when the Dutch Republic collapsed before the Napoleonic armies. This caused many bankers established in Amsterdam (e.g. Hope, Baring I'm), to move to London. Also, London's market-centred system (as opposed to the bank-centred one in Amsterdam) grew more dominant in the 18th century. The London financial elite was strengthened by a strong Jewish community from all over Europe capable of mastering the most sophisticated financial tools of the time. This economic strength of the city was attributed to its diversity.\nBy the mid-19th century London was the leading global financial centre, and at the end of the century over half the world's trade was financed in British currency. As of 2023[ [update]], London ranks second in the world rankings on the Global Financial Centres Index (GFCI), and it ranked second in A.T. Kearney's 2018 Global Cities Index.\nLondon's largest industry is finance, and its financial exports make it a large contributor to the UK's balance of payments. Notwithstanding a post-Brexit exodus of stock listings from the London Stock Exchange, London is one of Europe's most economically powerful cities, and it remains one of the major financial centres of the world. It is the world's biggest currency trading centre, accounting for some 37% of the $5.1\u00a0trillion average daily volume, according to the BIS. Over 85% (3.2\u00a0million) of the employed population of greater London works in the services industries. Because of its prominent global role, London's economy had been affected by the 2008 financial crisis. However, by 2010, the city had recovered, put in place new regulatory powers, proceeded to regain lost ground and re-established London's economic dominance. Along with professional services headquarters, the City of London is home to the Bank of England, London Stock Exchange, and Lloyd's of London insurance market. Founded in 1690, Barclays, whose branch in Enfield, north London installed the first cash machine (ATM) in 1967, is one of the oldest banks in continuous operation.\nOver half the UK's top 100 listed companies (the FTSE 100) and over 100 of Europe's 500 largest companies have their headquarters in central London. Over 70% of the FTSE 100 are within London's metropolitan area, and 75% of Fortune 500 companies have offices in London. In a 1992 report commissioned by the London Stock Exchange, Sir Adrian Cadbury, chairman of his family's confectionery company Cadbury, produced the Cadbury Report, a code of best practice which served as a basis for reform of corporate governance around the world.\nMedia and technology.\nMedia companies are concentrated in London, and the media distribution industry is London's second most competitive sector. The BBC, the world's oldest national broadcaster, is a significant employer, while other broadcasters, including ITV, Channel 4, Channel 5 and Sky, also have headquarters around the city. Many national newspapers, including \"The Times\", founded in 1785, are edited in London; the term Fleet Street (where most national newspapers operated) remains a metonym for the British national press. The communications company WPP plc is the world's largest advertising agency.\nA large number of technology companies are based in London, notably in East London Tech City, also known as Silicon Roundabout. In 2014 the city was among the first to receive a geoTLD. In February 2014 London was ranked as the European City of the Future in the 2014/15 list by \"fDi Intelligence\". A museum in Bletchley Park, where Alan Turing was based during the Second World War, is in Bletchley, north of central London, as is The National Museum of Computing.\nThe gas and electricity distribution networks that manage and operate the towers, cables and pressure systems that deliver energy to consumers across the city are managed by National Grid plc, SGN and UK Power Networks.\nTourism.\nLondon is one of the leading tourist destinations in the world. It is also the top city in the world by visitor cross-border spending, estimated at US$20.23\u00a0billion in 2015. Tourism is one of London's prime industries, employing 700,000 full-time workers in 2016, and contributes \u00a336\u00a0billion a year to the economy. The city accounts for 54% of all inbound visitor spending in the UK.\nIn 2024, nine of the ten most-visited attractions in the UK were in London (shown with visits per venue):\nThe number of hotel rooms in London in 2023 stood at 155,700 and is expected to grow to 183,600 rooms, the most of any city outside China. Luxury hotels in London include the Savoy (opened in 1889), Claridge's (opened in 1812 and rebuilt in 1898), the Ritz (opened in 1906) and the Dorchester (opened in 1931), while budget hotel chains include Premier Inn and Travelodge.\nTransport.\nTransport is one of the four main areas of policy administered by the Mayor of London, but the mayor's financial control does not extend to the longer-distance rail network that enters London. In 2007, the Mayor of London assumed responsibility for some local lines, which now form the London Overground network, adding to the existing responsibility for the London Underground, trams and buses. The public transport network is administered by Transport for London (TfL).\nThe lines that formed the London Underground, as well as trams and buses, became part of an integrated transport system in 1933 when the London Passenger Transport Board or \"London Transport\" was created. Transport for London is now the statutory corporation responsible for most aspects of the transport system in Greater London, and is run by a board and a commissioner appointed by the Mayor of London.\nAviation.\nLondon is a major international air transport hub with the busiest city airspace in the world. Eight airports use the word \"London\" in their name, but most traffic passes through six of these. Additionally, various other airports also serve London, catering primarily to general aviation flights.\nRail.\nUnderground and DLR.\nOpened in 1863, the London Underground, commonly referred to as the Tube or just the Underground, is the oldest and third-longest metro system in the world. The system serves 272 stations, and was formed from several private companies, including the world's first underground electric line, the City and South London Railway, which opened in 1890.\nOver 4\u00a0million journeys are made every day on the Underground network, over 1\u00a0billion each year. An investment programme is attempting to reduce congestion and improve reliability, including \u00a36.5\u00a0billion (\u20ac7.7\u00a0billion) spent before the 2012 Summer Olympics. The Docklands Light Railway (DLR), which opened in 1987, is a second, more local metro system using smaller and lighter tram-type vehicles that serve the Docklands, Greenwich and Lewisham.\nSuburban.\nThere are 368 railway stations in the London fare zones on an extensive above-ground suburban railway network. South London, particularly, has a high concentration of railways as it has fewer Underground lines. Most rail lines terminate around the centre of London, running into eighteen terminal stations, with the exception of the Thameslink trains connecting Bedford in the north and Brighton in the south via Luton and Gatwick airports. London has Britain's busiest station\u00a0by number of passengers, Waterloo, with over 184\u00a0million people using the interchange station complex (which includes Waterloo East station) each year. Clapham Junction is one of Europe's busiest rail interchanges.\nWith the need for more rail capacity, the Elizabeth Line (also known as Crossrail) opened in May 2022. It is a new railway line running east to west through London and into the Home Counties with a branch to Heathrow Airport. It was Europe's biggest construction project, with a \u00a315\u00a0billion projected cost.\nInter-city and international.\nLondon is the centre of the National Rail network, with 70% of rail journeys starting or ending in London. King's Cross station and Euston station, both in London, are the starting points of the East Coast Main Line and the West Coast Main Line \u2013 the two main railway lines in Britain. Like suburban rail services, regional and inter-city trains depart from several termini around the city centre, directly linking London with most of Great Britain's major cities and towns. \"The Flying Scotsman\" is an express passenger train service that has operated between London and Edinburgh since 1862; the world famous steam locomotive named after this service, \"Flying Scotsman\", was the first locomotive to reach the officially authenticated speed of in 1934.\nSome international railway services to Continental Europe were operated during the 20th century as boat trains. The opening of the Channel Tunnel in 1994 connected London directly to the continental rail network, allowing Eurostar services to begin. Since 2007, high-speed trains link St. Pancras International with Lille, Calais, Paris, Disneyland Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam and other European tourist destinations via the High Speed 1 rail link and the Channel Tunnel. The first high-speed domestic trains started in June 2009, linking Kent to London. There are plans for a second high speed line linking London to the Midlands, North West England, and Yorkshire.\nBuses, coaches and trams.\nLondon's bus network runs 24 hours a day with about 9,300 vehicles, over 675 bus routes and about 19,000 bus stops. In 2019 the network had over 2 billion commuter trips per year. Since 2010 an average of \u00a31.2 billion is taken in revenue each year. London has one of the largest wheelchair-accessible networks in the world, which, from 2009, became more accessible to hearing and visually impaired passengers as audio-visual announcements were introduced.\nAn emblem of London, the red double-decker bus first appeared in the city in 1947 with the AEC Regent III RT (predecessor to the AEC Routemaster). London's coach hub is Victoria Coach Station, opened in 1932. Nationalised in 1970 and then purchased by London Transport (now Transport for London), Victoria Coach Station has over 14\u00a0million passengers a year and provides services across the UK and continental Europe.\nThere is a modern tram network serving South London, known as Tramlink. It has 39 stops and four routes, and carried over 29\u00a0million people in 2017. Since June 2008, Transport for London has completely owned and operated Tramlink.\nCable car.\nLondon's first and to date only cable car is the London Cable Car, which opened in June 2012. The cable car crosses the Thames and links Greenwich Peninsula with the Royal Docks in the east of the city. It is able to carry up to 2,500 passengers per hour in each direction at peak times.\nCycling.\nIn the Greater London Area, around 670,000 people use a bike every day, meaning around 7% of the total population of around 8.8\u00a0million use a bike on an average day. Cycling has become an increasingly popular way to get around London. The launch of a bicycle hire scheme in July 2010 was successful and generally well received.\nPort and river boats.\nThe Port of London, once the largest in the world, is now only the second-largest in the United Kingdom, handling 45\u00a0million tonnes of cargo each year as of 2009. Most of this cargo passes through the Port of Tilbury, outside the boundary of Greater London.\nLondon has river boat services on the Thames known as Thames Clippers, which offer both commuter and tourist boat services. At major piers including Canary Wharf, London Bridge City, Battersea Power Station and London Eye (Waterloo), services depart at least every 20 minutes during commuter times. The Woolwich Ferry, with 2.5\u00a0million passengers every year, is a frequent service linking the North and South Circular Roads.\nRoads.\nAlthough the majority of journeys in central London are made by public transport, car travel is common in the suburbs. The inner ring road (around the city centre), the North and South Circular roads (just within the suburbs), and the outer orbital motorway (the M25, just outside the built-up area in most places) encircle the city and are intersected by a number of busy radial routes, but very few motorways penetrate into inner London. The M25 is the second-longest ring-road motorway in Europe at long. The A1 and M1 connect London to Leeds, and Newcastle and Edinburgh.\nThe Austin Motor Company began making hackney carriages (London taxis) in 1929, and models include Austin FX3 from 1948, Austin FX4 from 1958, with more recent models TXII and TX4 manufactured by London Taxis International. The BBC states, \"ubiquitous black cabs and red double-decker buses all have long and tangled stories that are deeply embedded in London's traditions\".\nAlthough traditionally black, some are painted in other colours or bear advertising.\nLondon is notorious for its traffic congestion; in 2009, the average speed of a car in the rush hour was recorded at . In 2003, a congestion charge was introduced to reduce traffic volumes in the city centre. With a few exceptions, motorists are required to pay to drive within a defined zone encompassing much of central London. Motorists who are residents of the defined zone can buy a greatly reduced season pass. Over the course of several years, the average number of cars entering the centre of London on a weekday was reduced from 195,000 to 125,000. The zebra crossing, the world's first marked pedestrian crossing, appear across London; they were developed and trialled by the Ministry of Transport in 1949 due to the increase in car traffic after the Second World War before the first was officially installed in 1951. Low Traffic Neighbourhoods (LTN) were widely introduced in London.\nEducation.\nTertiary education.\nLondon is a major global centre of higher education, teaching and research and has the largest concentration of higher education institutes in Europe. According to the QS World University Rankings 2015/16, London has the greatest concentration of top class universities in the world and its international student population of around 110,000 is larger than any other city in the world. A 2014 PricewaterhouseCoopers report termed London the global capital of higher education.\nA number of world-leading education institutions are based in London. In the 2022 \"QS World University Rankings\", Imperial College London is ranked No. 6 in the world, University College London (UCL) is ranked 8th, and King's College London (KCL) is ranked 37th. All are regularly ranked highly, with Imperial College being the UK's leading university in the Research Excellence Framework ranking 2021. The London School of Economics (LSE) has been described as the world's leading social science institution for both teaching and research. The London Business School is considered one of the world's leading business schools and in 2015 its MBA programme was ranked second-best in the world by the \"Financial Times\". The city is also home to three of the world's top ten performing arts schools (as ranked by the 2020 QS World University Rankings): the Royal College of Music (ranking 2nd in the world), the Royal Academy of Music (ranking 4th) and the Guildhall School of Music and Drama (ranking 6th).\nWith students in London and around 48,000 in University of London Worldwide, the federal University of London is the largest contact teaching university in the UK. It includes five multi-faculty universities \u2013 City, King's College London, Queen Mary, Royal Holloway and UCL \u2013 and a number of smaller and more specialised institutions including Birkbeck, the Courtauld Institute of Art, Goldsmiths, the London Business School, the London School of Economics, the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, the Royal Academy of Music, the Central School of Speech and Drama, the Royal Veterinary College and the School of Oriental and African Studies.\nUniversities in London outside the University of London system include Brunel University, Imperial College London, Kingston University, London Metropolitan University, University of East London, University of West London, University of Westminster, London South Bank University, Middlesex University and University of the Arts London (the largest university of art, design, fashion, communication and the performing arts in Europe). There are also three international universities \u2013 Regent's University London, Richmond American University London and Schiller International University.\nLondon is home to five major medical schools\u00a0\u2013 Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry (part of Queen Mary), King's College London School of Medicine (the largest medical school in Europe), Imperial College School of Medicine, UCL Medical School and St George's, University of London\u00a0\u2013 and has many affiliated teaching hospitals. It is also a major centre for biomedical research, and three of the UK's eight academic health science centres are based in the city\u00a0\u2013 Imperial College Healthcare, King's Health Partners and UCL Partners (the largest such centre in Europe). Additionally, many biomedical and biotechnology spin out companies from these research institutions are based around the city, most prominently in White City. Founded by Florence Nightingale at St Thomas' Hospital in 1860, the first nursing school is now part of King's College London. It was at King's in 1952 where a team led by Rosalind Franklin captured \"Photo 51\", the critical evidence in identifying the structure of DNA. There are a number of business schools in London, including the London School of Business and Finance, Cass Business School (part of City University London), Hult International Business School, ESCP Europe, European Business School London, Imperial College Business School, the London Business School and the UCL School of Management.\nLondon is also home to many specialist arts education institutions, including esteemed drama schools such as RADA (Royal Academy of Dramatic Art), the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (LAMDA), Drama Studio London, Sylvia Young Theatre School, the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama and the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, as well as the London College of Contemporary Arts (LCCA), Central School of Ballet, London Contemporary Dance School, National Centre for Circus Arts, Rambert School of Ballet and Contemporary Dance, the Royal College of Art and Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and Dance. The BRIT School in the London borough of Croydon provides training for the performing arts and technologies.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThe majority of primary and secondary schools and further-education colleges in London are controlled by the London boroughs or otherwise state-funded; leading examples include Ashbourne College, Bethnal Green Academy, Brampton Manor Academy, City and Islington College, City of Westminster College, David Game College, Ealing, Hammersmith and West London College, Leyton Sixth Form College, London Academy of Excellence, Tower Hamlets College, and Newham Collegiate Sixth Form Centre. There are also a number of private schools and colleges in London, some old and famous, such as City of London School, Harrow (alumni includes seven former British prime ministers), St Paul's School, Haberdashers' Aske's Boys' School, University College School, The John Lyon School, Highgate School and Westminster School.\nRoyal Observatory, Greenwich and learned societies.\nFounded in 1675, the Royal Observatory in Greenwich was established to address the problem of calculating longitude for navigational purposes. This pioneering work in solving longitude featured in astronomer royal Nevil Maskelyne's \"Nautical Almanac\" which made the Greenwich meridian the universal reference point, and helped lead to the international adoption of Greenwich as the prime meridian (0\u00b0 longitude) in 1884.\nImportant scientific learned societies based in London include the Royal Society - the UK's national academy of sciences and the oldest national scientific institution in the world - founded in 1660, and the Royal Institution, founded in 1799. Since 1825, the Royal Institution Christmas Lectures have presented scientific subjects to a general audience, and speakers have included the physicist and inventor Michael Faraday, the aerospace engineer Frank Whittle, the naturalist David Attenborough and the evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins.\nCulture.\nLeisure and entertainment.\nLeisure is a major part of the London economy. A 2003 report attributed a quarter of the entire UK leisure economy to London at 25.6 events per 1000 people. The city is one of the four fashion capitals of the world, and, according to official statistics, is the world's third-busiest film production centre, presents more live comedy than any other city, and has the biggest theatre audience of any city in the world.\nWithin the City of Westminster, the entertainment district of the West End has its focus around Leicester Square, where London and world film premieres are held, and Piccadilly Circus, with its giant electronic advertisements. London's theatre district is here, as are many cinemas, bars, clubs, and restaurants, including the city's Chinatown district (in Soho), and just to the east is Covent Garden, an area housing speciality shops. In 1881, the West End's Savoy Theatre, which was built to showcase the plays of Gilbert and Sullivan, was fitted with the incandescent light bulb developed by Sir Joseph Swan to become the first public building in the world to be lit entirely by electricity. The city is the home of Andrew Lloyd Webber, whose musicals have dominated West End theatre since the late 20th century. Agatha Christie's \"The Mousetrap\", the world's longest-running play, has been performed in the West End since 1952. The Laurence Olivier Awards\u2013named after Laurence Olivier\u2013are given annually by the Society of London Theatre. The Royal Ballet, English National Ballet, Royal Opera, and English National Opera are based in London and perform at the Royal Opera House, the London Coliseum, Sadler's Wells Theatre and the Royal Albert Hall, as well as touring the country. London was the centre of music hall, with the Hackney Empire, host to many music hall stars, among the best-surviving Edwardian era variety theatres.\nIslington's long Upper Street, extending northwards from Angel, has more bars and restaurants than any other street in the UK. Europe's busiest shopping area is Oxford Street, a shopping street nearly long, making it the longest shopping street in the UK. It is home to vast numbers of retailers and department stores, including Selfridges flagship store. Knightsbridge, home to the equally renowned Harrods department store, lies to the south-west. One of the world's largest retail destinations, London frequently ranks at or near the top of retail sales of any city. Opened in 1760 with its flagship store on Regent Street since 1881, Hamleys is the oldest toy shop in the world. The Camden Town shoe retailer of Dr. Martens footwear was a favourite haunt of punk musicians. Madame Tussauds wax museum opened in Baker Street in 1835, an era viewed as being when London's tourism industry began.\nLondon is home to the designers John Galliano, Stella McCartney, Manolo Blahnik and Jimmy Choo, among others; its renowned art and fashion schools make it one of the four international centres of fashion. Mary Quant designed the miniskirt in her King's Road boutique in Swinging Sixties London. In 2017, London was ranked the top city for luxury store openings. London Fashion Week takes place twice a year, in February and September; exhibitions have included \"Jack the Ripper Stalks His Victims\", the first collection by Alexander McQueen. Londoners on the catwalk have included Naomi Campbell, Kate Moss and Cara Delevingne.\nLondon offers a great variety of cuisine as a result of its ethnically diverse population. Gastronomic centres include the Bangladeshi restaurants of Brick Lane and the Chinese restaurants of Chinatown. There are Chinese takeaways throughout London, as are Indian restaurants which provide Indian and Anglo-Indian cuisine. Around 1860, the first fish and chips shop in London was opened by Joseph Malin, a Jewish immigrant, in Bow. The full English breakfast dates from the Victorian era, and many cafes in London serve a full English throughout the day. London has five 3-Michelin star restaurants, including Restaurant Gordon Ramsay in Chelsea. Many hotels in London provide a traditional afternoon tea service, such as the Oscar Wilde Lounge at the Hotel Caf\u00e9 Royal in Piccadilly, and a themed tea service is also available, for example an \"Alice in Wonderland\" themed afternoon tea served at the Egerton House Hotel, and \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" themed afternoon tea at One Aldwych in Covent Garden. The nation's most popular biscuit to dunk in tea, chocolate digestives have been manufactured by McVitie's at their Harlesden factory in north-west London since 1925.\nThere is a variety of annual events, beginning with the relatively new New Year's Day Parade, a fireworks display at the London Eye; the world's second largest street party, the Notting Hill Carnival, is held on the late August Bank Holiday each year. Traditional parades include November's Lord Mayor's Show, a centuries-old event celebrating the annual appointment of a new Lord Mayor of the City of London with a procession along the streets of the city, and June's Trooping the Colour, a formal military pageant, which culminates with a flypast over London, performed by regiments of the Commonwealth and British armies to celebrate the King's Official Birthday. The Boishakhi Mela is a Bengali New Year festival celebrated by the British Bangladeshi community. It is the largest open-air Asian festival in Europe. After the Notting Hill Carnival, it is the second-largest street festival in the United Kingdom attracting over 80,000 visitors. First held in 1862, the RHS Chelsea Flower Show (run by the Royal Horticultural Society) takes place in May every year.\nLGBT scene.\nThe first gay bar in London in the modern sense was The Cave of the Golden Calf, established as a nightclub in an underground location at 9 Heddon Street, just off Regent Street, in 1912 and \"which developed a reputation for sexual freedom and tolerance of same-sex relations\". \nWhile London has been an LGBT tourism destination, after homosexuality was decriminalised in England in 1967 gay bar culture became more visible, and from the early 1970s Soho (and in particular Old Compton Street) became the centre of the London LGBT community. G-A-Y, previously based at the Astoria, and now Heaven, is a long-running nightclub.\nWider British cultural movements have influenced LGBT culture: for example, the emergence of glam rock in the UK in the early 1970s, via Marc Bolan and David Bowie, saw a generation of teenagers begin playing with the idea of androgyny, and the West End musical \"The Rocky Horror Show\", which debuted in London in 1973, is also widely said to have been an influence on countercultural and sexual liberation movements. The Blitz Kids (which included Boy George) frequented the Tuesday club-night at Blitz in Covent Garden, helping launch the New Romantic subcultural movement in the late 1970s. Today, the annual London Pride Parade and the London Lesbian and Gay Film Festival are held in the city.\nLiterature, film and television.\nLondon has been the setting for many works of literature. The pilgrims in Geoffrey Chaucer's late 14th-century \"Canterbury Tales\" set out for Canterbury from London. William Shakespeare spent a large part of his life living and working in London; his contemporary Ben Jonson was also based there, and some of his work, most notably his play \"The Alchemist\", was set in the city. \"A Journal of the Plague Year\" (1722) by Daniel Defoe is a fictionalisation of the events of the 1665 Great Plague.\nThe literary centres of London have traditionally been hilly Hampstead and (since the early 20th century) Bloomsbury. Writers closely associated with the city are the diarist Samuel Pepys, noted for his eyewitness account of the Great Fire; Charles Dickens, whose representation of a foggy, snowy, grimy London of street sweepers and pickpockets has influenced people's vision of early Victorian London; and Virginia Woolf, regarded as one of the foremost modernist literary figures of the 20th century. Later important depictions of London from the 19th and early-20th centuries are Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes stories. Robert Louis Stevenson mixed in London literary circles, and in 1886 he wrote the \"Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde\", a gothic novella set in Victorian London. In 1898 H. G. Wells' science fiction novel \"The War of the Worlds\" sees London (and southern England) invaded by Martians. Letitia Elizabeth Landon wrote \"Calendar of the London Seasons\" in 1834. Modern writers influenced by the city include Peter Ackroyd, author of \"\", and Iain Sinclair, who writes in the genre of psychogeography. In the 1940s, George Orwell wrote essays in the \"London Evening Standard\", including \"A Nice Cup of Tea\" (method for making tea) and \"The Moon Under Water\" (an ideal pub). The evacuation of children from London during the Second World War is depicted in C. S. Lewis' first Narnia book, \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" (1950). On Christmas Eve 1925, Winnie-the-Pooh debuted in London's \"Evening News\", with the character based on a stuffed toy A. A. Milne bought for his son Christopher Robin in Harrods. In 1958 the author Michael Bond created Paddington Bear, a refugee found in Paddington station. A screen adaptation, \"Paddington\" (2014), features the calypso song \"London is the Place for Me\". Buckingham Palace features in Roald Dahl's 1982 novel \"The BFG\".\nLondon has played a significant role in the film industry. Major studios within or bordering London include Pinewood, Elstree, Ealing, Shepperton, Twickenham, and Leavesden, with the \"James Bond\" and \"Harry Potter\" series among many notable films produced here. Working Title Films has its headquarters in London. A post-production community is centred in Soho, and London houses six of the world's largest visual effects companies, such as Framestore. The Imaginarium, a digital performance-capture studio, was founded by Andy Serkis. London has been the setting for films including \"Oliver Twist\" (1948), \"Scrooge\" (1951), \"Peter Pan\" (1953), \"One Hundred and One Dalmatians\" (1961), \"My Fair Lady\" (1964), \"Mary Poppins\" (1964), \"Blowup\" (1966), \"A Clockwork Orange\" (1971), \"The Long Good Friday\" (1980), \"The Great Mouse Detective\" (1986), \"Notting Hill\" (1999), \"28 Days Later\" (2002), \"Love Actually\" (2003), \"V for Vendetta\" (2005), \"\" (2008) and \"The King's Speech\" (2010). Notable actors and filmmakers from London include Charlie Chaplin, Alfred Hitchcock, Michael Caine, Julie Andrews, Peter Sellers, David Lean, Julie Christie, Gary Oldman, Emma Thompson, Guy Ritchie, Christopher Nolan, Alan Rickman, Jude Law, Helena Bonham Carter, Idris Elba, Tom Hardy, Daniel Radcliffe, Keira Knightley, Riz Ahmed, Dev Patel, Daniel Kaluuya, Tom Holland and Daniel Day-Lewis. Post-war Ealing comedies featured Alec Guinness, from the 1950s Hammer Horrors starred Christopher Lee, films directed by Michael Powell included the London-set early slasher \"Peeping Tom\" (1960), the 1970s comedy troupe Monty Python had film editing suites in Covent Garden, while since the 1990s Richard Curtis's romantic comedies have featured Hugh Grant. The largest cinema chain in the country, Odeon Cinemas, was founded in London in 1928 by Oscar Deutsch. The BFI IMAX on the South Bank is the largest cinema screen in the UK. The British Academy Film Awards (BAFTAs) have been held in London since 1949, with the BAFTA Fellowship the Academy's highest accolade. Founded in 1957, the BFI London Film Festival takes place over two weeks every October.\nLondon is a major centre for television production, with studios including Television Centre, ITV Studios, Sky Campus and Fountain Studios; the latter hosted the original talent shows, \"Pop Idol\", \"The X Factor\" and \"Britain's Got Talent\" (the latter two created by the television personality Simon Cowell, who starred as a judge in all three shows), before each format was exported around the world. Formerly a franchise of ITV, Thames Television featured comedians such as Benny Hill and Rowan Atkinson (\"Mr. Bean\" was first screened by Thames), while Talkback produced \"Da Ali G Show\", which featured Sacha Baron Cohen as Ali G. Many television shows have been set in London, including the popular television soap opera \"EastEnders\".\nMuseums, art galleries and libraries.\nLondon is home to many museums, galleries, and other institutions, many of which are free of admission charges and are major tourist attractions as well as playing a research role. The first of these to be established was the British Museum in Bloomsbury, in 1753. Originally containing antiquities, natural history specimens, and the national library, the museum now has 7\u00a0million artefacts from around the globe. In 1824 the National Gallery was founded to house the British national collection of Western paintings; this now occupies a prominent position in Trafalgar Square.\nThe British Library is the second largest library in the world, and the national library of the United Kingdom. There are many other research libraries, including the Wellcome Library and Dana Centre, as well as university libraries, including the British Library of Political and Economic Science at LSE, the Abdus Salam Library at Imperial, the Maughan Library at King's, and the Senate House Libraries at the University of London.\nIn the latter half of the 19th century the locale of South Kensington was developed as \"Albertopolis\", a cultural and scientific quarter. Three major national museums are there: the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Natural History Museum and the Science Museum. The National Portrait Gallery was founded in 1856 to house depictions of figures from British history; its holdings now comprise the world's most extensive collection of portraits. The national gallery of British art is at Tate Britain, originally established as an annexe of the National Gallery in 1897. The Tate Gallery, as it was formerly known, also became a major centre for modern art. In 2000 this collection moved to Tate Modern, a new gallery housed in the former Bankside Power Station which is accessed by pedestrians north of the Thames via the Millennium Bridge.\nMusic.\nLondon is one of the major classical and popular music capitals of the world and hosts major music corporations, such as Universal Music Group International and Warner Music Group, and countless bands, musicians and industry professionals. The city is also home to many orchestras and concert halls, such as the Barbican Arts Centre (principal base of the London Symphony Orchestra and the London Symphony Chorus), the Southbank Centre (London Philharmonic Orchestra and the Philharmonia Orchestra), Cadogan Hall (Royal Philharmonic Orchestra) and the Royal Albert Hall (The Proms). The Proms, an eight-week summer season of daily orchestral classical music first held in 1895, ends with the Last Night of the Proms. London's two main opera houses are the Royal Opera House and the London Coliseum (home to the English National Opera). The UK's largest pipe organ is at the Royal Albert Hall. Other significant instruments are in cathedrals and major churches, the church bells of St Clement Danes feature in the 1744 nursery rhyme \"Oranges and Lemons\". Several conservatoires are within the city: Royal Academy of Music, Royal College of Music, Guildhall School of Music and Drama, and Trinity Laban. The record label EMI was formed in the city in 1931, and an early employee for the company, Alan Blumlein, created stereo sound that year. The guitar amp engineer Jim Marshall founded Marshall Amplification in London in 1962.\nLondon has numerous venues for rock and pop concerts, including the world's busiest indoor venue, the O2 Arena, and Wembley Arena, as well as many mid-sized venues, such as Brixton Academy, the Hammersmith Apollo and the Shepherd's Bush Empire. Several music festivals, including the Wireless Festival, Lovebox, and Hyde Park's British Summer Time, are held in London.\nThe city is home to the original Hard Rock Cafe and the Abbey Road Studios, where the Beatles recorded many of their hits. In the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, musicians and groups like Elton John, Pink Floyd, David Bowie, the Rolling Stones, Queen, Eric Clapton, the Who, the Kinks, Cliff Richard, Led Zeppelin, Iron Maiden, Deep Purple, T. Rex, the Police, Elvis Costello, Dire Straits, Cat Stevens, Fleetwood Mac, the Cure, Madness, the Jam, Culture Club, Dusty Springfield, Phil Collins, Rod Stewart, Status Quo and Sade, derived their sound from the streets and rhythms of London.\nLondon was instrumental in the development of punk music, with groups such as the Sex Pistols, the Clash, and the fashion designer Vivienne Westwood based in the city. Other artists to emerge from the London music scene include George Michael, Kate Bush, Seal, Siouxsie and the Banshees, Bush, the Spice Girls, Jamiroquai, Blur, the Prodigy, Suede, Gorillaz, Mumford &amp; Sons, Coldplay, Dido, Amy Winehouse, Adele, Sam Smith, Ed Sheeran, Leona Lewis, Ellie Goulding, Dua Lipa and Florence and the Machine. Artists from London played a prominent role in the development of synth-pop, including Gary Numan, Depeche Mode, the Pet Shop Boys and Eurythmics; the latter's \"Sweet Dreams (Are Made of This)\" was recorded in the attic of their north London home, heralding a trend for home recording methods. Recent London-based alternative artists include Wolf Alice, the Vaccines, The xx, Bloc Party, The Libertines and Sleep Token. Artists from London with a Caribbean influence include Hot Chocolate, Billy Ocean, Soul II Soul and Eddy Grant, with the latter fusing reggae, soul and samba with rock and pop. London is also a centre for urban music. In particular the genres UK garage, drum and bass, dubstep, and grime evolved in the city from the foreign genres of house, hip hop and reggae, alongside local drum and bass. Urban acts from London include Stormzy, M.I.A., Jay Sean, Rita Ora and Central Cee. Music station BBC Radio 1Xtra was set up to support the rise of local urban contemporary music both in London and in the rest of the United Kingdom. The British Phonographic Industry's annual popular music awards, the Brit Awards, are held in London.\nRecreation.\nParks and open spaces.\nA 2013 report by the City of London Corporation said that London is the \"greenest city\" in Europe with 35,000 acres (14,164 hectares) of public parks, woodlands and gardens. In 2019, London became the world's first National Park City, highlighting its dedication to preserving green spaces and nature. The city is home to nearly half of its area covered in green and blue spaces, featuring around 3,000 parks, over 8 million trees, and 150 nature reserves.\nThe largest parks in the central area of London are three of the eight Royal Parks, namely Hyde Park and its neighbour Kensington Gardens in the west, and Regent's Park to the north. Hyde Park in particular is popular for sports and sometimes hosts open-air concerts. Regent's Park contains London Zoo, the world's oldest scientific zoo, and is near Madame Tussauds wax museum. Primrose Hill is a popular spot from which to view the city skyline. Close to Hyde Park are smaller Royal Parks, Green Park and St James's Park. A number of large parks lie outside the city centre, including Hampstead Heath and the remaining Royal Parks of Greenwich Park to the southeast, and Bushy Park and Richmond Park (the largest) to the southwest. Hampton Court Park is also a royal park, but, because it contains a palace, it is administered by the Historic Royal Palaces, unlike the eight Royal Parks. Crystal Palace Park in south-east London was laid out as a pleasure ground, and, reflecting the public enthusiasm for dinosaurs that first developed in Victorian England, it contains the first-ever life-sized models of dinosaurs.\nClose to Richmond Park is Kew Gardens, which has the world's largest collection of living plants. In 2003, the gardens were put on the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites. There are also parks administered by London's borough Councils, including Victoria Park in the East End and Battersea Park in the centre. Some more informal, semi-natural open spaces also exist, including Hampstead Heath and Epping Forest, both controlled by the City of London Corporation. Hampstead Heath incorporates Kenwood House, a former stately home and a popular location in the summer months when classical musical concerts are held by the lake. Epping Forest is a popular venue for various outdoor activities, including mountain biking, walking, horse riding, golf, angling, and orienteering. Three of the UK's most-visited theme parks, Thorpe Park near Staines-upon-Thames, Chessington World of Adventures in Chessington and Legoland Windsor, are located within of London.\nWalking.\nWalking is a popular recreational activity in London. Areas that provide for walks include Wimbledon Common, Epping Forest, Hampton Court Park, Hampstead Heath, the eight Royal Parks, Regents Canal Walk, canals and disused railway tracks. Access to canals and rivers has improved recently, including the creation of the Thames Path, some of which is within Greater London, and the Wandle Trail along the River Wandle.\nOther long-distance paths, linking green spaces, have also been created, including the Capital Ring, the Green Chain Walk, London Outer Orbital Path (\"Loop\"), Jubilee Walkway, Lea Valley Walk and the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Walk.\nSport.\nLondon has hosted the Summer Olympics three times: in 1908, 1948, and 2012, making it the first city to host the modern Games three times. The city was also the host of the British Empire Games in 1934. In 2017, London hosted the World Championships in Athletics for the first time.\nLondon's most popular sport is association football, and it has seven clubs in the Premier League in the 2025\u201326 season: Arsenal, Brentford, Chelsea, Crystal Palace, Fulham, Tottenham Hotspur and West Ham United. Other professional men's teams in London are AFC Wimbledon, Barnet, Bromley, Charlton Athletic, Dagenham &amp; Redbridge, Leyton Orient, Millwall, Queens Park Rangers and Sutton United. Four London-based teams are in the Women's Super League: Arsenal, Chelsea, Tottenham and West Ham United.\nTwo Premiership Rugby union teams are based in Greater London: Harlequins and Saracens. Ealing Trailfinders and London Scottish play in the RFU Championship; other rugby union clubs in the city include Richmond, Rosslyn Park, Westcombe Park, and Blackheath. Twickenham Stadium in south-west London hosts home matches for the England national rugby union team. While rugby league is more popular in the north of England, the sport has one professional club in London\u00a0\u2013 the London Broncos, while the Challenge Cup final often takes place in the city.\nOne of London's best-known annual sports competitions is the Wimbledon Tennis Championships, held at the All England Club in the south-western suburb of Wimbledon since 1877. Played in late June to early July, it is the oldest tennis tournament in the world and widely considered the most prestigious. Founded in London in 1881, Slazenger has provided tennis balls for Wimbledon since 1902, the oldest sponsorship in sport.\nLondon has two Test cricket grounds which host the England cricket team, Lord's (home of Middlesex C.C.C.) and the Oval (home of Surrey C.C.C.). Lord's has hosted four finals of the Cricket World Cup and is known as the \"Home of Cricket\". In golf, the Wentworth Club is located in Virginia Water, Surrey on the south-west fringes of London, while the closest venue to London that is used as one of the courses for the Open Championship, the oldest major and tournament in golf, is Royal St George's in Sandwich, Kent. The rules of modern boxing, the Queensberry Rules, were formulated in London in 1867, and since then fights have taken place at York Hall (the spiritual home of British boxing), and larger arenas and stadiums across the city. Alexandra Palace in north London hosts the PDC World Darts Championship and the Masters snooker tournament. Other key annual events are the mass-participation London Marathon and the University Boat Race on the Thames contested between Oxford and Cambridge.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17869", "revid": "29937276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17869", "title": "Lag\u00e2ri Hasan \u00c7elebi", "text": "Ottoman aviator\nLag\u00e2ri Hasan \u00c7elebi was an Ottoman scientist, engineer and aviator who, according to the account written by traveller Evliya \u00c7elebi, made a successful crewed rocket flight.\nAccount.\nEvliya \u00c7elebi reported that in 1633, Lagari Hasan \u00c7elebi blasted off from Sarayburnu, (the promontory below the Topkap\u0131 Palace in Istanbul) in a 7-winged rocket propelled by 50 okka (140\u00a0lbs) of gunpowder. The flight was said to have been undertaken at the time of the birth of Sultan Murad IV's daughter. As Evliya Celebi wrote, Lagari proclaimed before launching his craft \"O my sultan! Be blessed, I am going to talk to Jesus!\"; after ascending in the rocket, he landed in the sea, swimming ashore and joking \"O my sultan! Jesus sends his regards to you!\"; he was rewarded by the Sultan with silver and the rank of sipahi in the Ottoman army.\nEvliya \u00c7elebi also wrote of Lagari's brother, Hez\u00e2rfen Ahmed \u00c7elebi, making a flight by glider a year earlier.\nPopular culture.\n\"Istanbul Beneath My Wings\" is a 1996 film about the lives of Lagari Hasan \u00c7elebi, his brother and fellow aviator Hez\u00e2rfen Ahmed \u00c7elebi, and Ottoman society in the early 17th century as witnessed and narrated by Evliya \u00c7elebi.\nThe legend was addressed in an experiment by the television show \"MythBusters\", on November 11, 2009, in the episode \"Crash and Burn\"; however, the team noted that Evliya \u00c7elebi had not sufficiently specified the alleged design used by Lag\u00e2ri Hasan and said that it would have been \"extremely difficult\" for a 17th-century figure, unequipped with modern steel alloys and welding, to land safely or even achieve thrust at all. Although the re-imagined rocket rose, it exploded midflight.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17871", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17871", "title": "Letterboxing (filming)", "text": "Black bars below and above an image\nLetter-boxing is the practice of transferring film shot in a widescreen aspect ratio to standard-width video formats while preserving the film's original aspect ratio. The resulting video-graphic image has mattes of empty space above and below it; these mattes are part of each frame of the video signal.\nEtymology.\nThe term refers to the shape of a letter-box, a slot in a wall or door through which mail is delivered, being rectangular and wider than it is high.\nEarly home video use.\nThe first use of letter-boxing in consumer video appeared with the RCA Capacitance Electronic Disc (CED) videodisc format. Initially, letter-boxing was limited to several key sequences of a film such as opening and closing credits, but was later used for entire films. The first fully letter-boxed CED release was \"Amarcord\", and several others followed including \"The Long Goodbye\", \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" and \"The King of Hearts\". Each disc contains a label noting the use of \"RCA's innovative wide-screen mastering technique\".\nIn cinema and home video.\nThe term \"SmileBox\" is a registered trademark used to describe a type of letter-boxing for Cinerama films, such as on the Blu-ray release of \"How the West Was Won\". The image is produced by using a map projection-like technique to approximate how the picture might look if projected onto a curved Cinerama screen.\nOn television.\nDigital broadcasting allows 1.78:1 widescreen format transmissions without losing resolution, and thus widescreen is the television norm. Most television channels in Europe are broadcasting standard-definition programming in , while in the USA, these are down-scaled to letterbox. When using a 1.33:1 screen, it is possible to display such programming in either a letter-boxing format or in a 1.33:1 center-cut format (where the edges of the picture are lost).\nA letter-boxed compromise ratio was often broadcast in analogue transmissions in European countries making the transition from 1.33:1 to 1.78:1. In addition, recent years have seen an increase of \"fake\" 2.40:1 letterbox mattes on television to give the impression of a cinema film, often seen in adverts, trailers or tv such as \"Top Gear\".\nCurrent high-definition television systems use video displays with a wider aspect ratio than older television sets, making it easier to accurately display widescreen films. In addition to films produced for the cinema, since the late 2000s a growing majority of television programming is produced in high definition widescreen.\nOn a widescreen television set, a 1.78:1 image fills the screen; however, 21:9 aspect ratio films are letter-boxed with narrow mattes. Because the 1.85:1 aspect ratio does not match the 1.78:1 aspect ratio of widescreen video, slight letter-boxing occurs. Usually, such matting of 1.85:1 film is eliminated to match the 1.78:1 aspect ratio in the image transference.\nLetterbox mattes are not necessarily black. IBM has used blue mattes for many of their TV advertisements, yellow mattes in their \"I am Superman\" Lotus ads, and green mattes in ads about efficiency and environmental sustainability. Others uses of colored mattes appear in ads from Allstate, Aleve, and Kodak among others, and in music videos such as Zebrahead's \"Playmate of the Year\". In other instances mattes are animated, such as in the music video for Rob Zombie's \"Never Gonna Stop (The Red Red Kroovy)\", and even parodied such as the final scene of the Crazy Frog Axel F music video in which Crazy Frog peeks over the matte on the lower edge of the screen with part of his hands overlapping the matte. Similar to breaking the border of a comic's panel, it is a form of breaking the fourth wall. The 2016 \"Ghostbusters\" exploited the edges for its 3D effects, with visual effects that \"spilled over\" into the letter-boxed areas. \nThe table below shows which TV lines will contain picture information when letterbox pictures are displayed on either 1.33:1 or 1.78:1 screens.\nPillar-boxing and window-boxing.\nPillar-boxing is the display of an image within a wider image frame by adding lateral mattes (vertical bars at the sides); for example, a 1.33:1 image has lateral mattes when displayed on a 16:9 aspect ratio television screen.\nAn alternative to pillar-boxing is \"tilt-and-scan\" (like pan and scan, but vertical), horizontally matting the original 1.33:1 television images to the 1.78:1 aspect ratio. At any given moment this crops part of the top or bottom of the frame, hence the need for the \"tilt\" component. A tilt is a camera move in which the camera tilts up or down, or in this case a selection of the upper or lower part of the image to omit.\nWindow-boxing occurs when an image appears centered in a television screen, with blank space on all four sides of the image, such as when a widescreen image that has been previously letter-boxed to fit 1.33:1 is then pillar-boxed to fit 1.78:1. It is also called \"matchbox\", \"gutter box\", and \"postage stamp\" display. This occurs on the DVD editions of the \"Star Trek\" films on a 1.33:1 tv when the included widescreen documentaries show footage from the original series. It is also seen in \"\", which displays widescreen pillar-boxing with 1.85:1 scenes in a 2.40:1 frame that is subsequently letter-boxed. It is common to see window-boxed commercials on tv networks, because many commercials are shot in 1.78:1 but distributed to networks in non-widescreen, letter-boxed to fit 1.33:1.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17872", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17872", "title": "Lincoln", "text": "Lincoln most commonly refers to:\nLincoln may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17874", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17874", "title": "Ligament", "text": "Connective tissue between bones\nA ligament is a type of fibrous connective tissue in the body that connects bones to other bones. It also connects flight feathers to bones, in dinosaurs and birds. All 30,000 species of amniotes (land animals with internal bones) have ligaments. \nIt is also known as \"articular ligament\", \"articular larua\", \"fibrous ligament\", or \"true ligament\".\nComparative anatomy.\nLigaments are similar to tendons and fasciae as they are all made of connective tissue. The differences among them are in the connections that they make: ligaments connect one bone to another bone, tendons connect muscle to bone, and fasciae connect muscles to other muscles. These are all found in the skeletal system of the human body. Ligaments cannot usually be regenerated naturally; however, there are periodontal ligament stem cells located near the periodontal ligament which are involved in the adult regeneration of periodontist ligament.\nThe study of ligaments is known as .\nHumans.\nOther ligaments in the body include the:\nArticular ligaments.\n\"Ligament\" most commonly refers to a band of dense regular connective tissue bundles made of collagenous fibers, with bundles protected by dense irregular connective tissue sheaths. Ligaments connect bones to other bones to form joints, while tendons connect bone to muscle. Some ligaments limit the mobility of articulations or prevent certain movements altogether.\nCapsular ligaments are part of the articular capsule that surrounds synovial joints. They act as mechanical reinforcements. Extra-capsular ligaments join in harmony with the other ligaments and provide joint stability. Intra-capsular ligaments, which are much less common, also provide stability but permit a far larger range of motion. Cruciate ligaments are paired ligaments in the form of a cross.\nLigaments are viscoelastic. They gradually strain when under tension and return to their original shape when the tension is removed. However, they cannot retain their original shape when extended past a certain point or for a prolonged period of time. This is one reason why dislocated joints must be set as quickly as possible: if the ligaments lengthen too much, then the joint will be weakened, becoming prone to future dislocations. Athletes, gymnasts, dancers, and martial artists perform stretching exercises to lengthen their ligaments, making their joints more supple.\nThe term \"hypermobility\" refers to the characteristic of people with more-elastic ligaments, allowing their joints to stretch and contort further; this is sometimes still called \"double-jointedness\".\nThe consequence of a broken ligament can be instability of the joint. Not all broken ligaments need surgery, but, if surgery is needed to stabilise the joint, the broken ligament can be repaired. Scar tissue may prevent this. If it is not possible to fix the broken ligament, other procedures such as the Brunelli procedure can correct the instability. Instability of a joint can over time lead to wear of the cartilage and eventually to osteoarthritis.\nArtificial ligaments.\nOne of the most often torn ligaments in the body is the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). The ACL is one of the ligaments crucial to knee stability and persons who tear their ACL often undergo reconstructive surgery, which can be done through a variety of techniques and materials. One of these techniques is the replacement of the ligament with an artificial material. Artificial ligaments are a synthetic material composed of a polymer, such as polyacrylonitrile fiber, polypropylene, PET (polyethylene terephthalate), or polyNaSS poly (sodium styrene sulfonate).\nExamples.\nThere are about 900 ligaments in an average adult human body, of which about 25 are listed here.\nPeritoneal ligaments.\nCertain folds of peritoneum are referred to as \"ligaments\". Examples include:\nFetal remnant ligaments.\nCertain tubular structures from the fetal period are referred to as \"ligaments\" after they close up and turn into cord-like structures:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17876", "revid": "41354242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17876", "title": "Library of Congress catalog scheme", "text": ""}
{"id": "17877", "revid": "50446147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17877", "title": "Loch Ness Monster", "text": "Mythical creature in Scotland\nThe Loch Ness Monster (), known affectionately as Nessie, is a mythical creature in Scottish folklore that is said to inhabit Loch Ness in the Scottish Highlands. It is often described as large, long-necked, and with one or more humps protruding from the water. Popular interest and belief in the creature has varied since it was brought to worldwide attention in 1933. Evidence of its existence is anecdotal, with a number of disputed photographs and sonar readings.\nThe scientific community explains alleged sightings of the Loch Ness Monster as hoaxes, wishful thinking, and the misidentification of mundane objects. The pseudoscience and subculture of cryptozoology has placed particular emphasis on the creature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigin of the name.\nIn August 1933, the \"Courier\" published the account of George Spicer's alleged sighting. Public interest skyrocketed, and countless letters were sent detailing different sightings. The letters described a \"monster fish,\" \"sea serpent,\" or \"dragon.\" Ultimately, the final name settled on was the \"Loch Ness monster.\" Since the 1940s, the creature has been affectionately called Nessie ().\nSightings.\nEarly precursors.\nSaint Columba (565).\nThe earliest report of a monster in the vicinity of Loch Ness appears in the \"Life of St. Columba\" by Adomn\u00e1n, written in the 7th century AD. According to Adomn\u00e1n, writing about a century after the events described, Irish monk Saint Columba was staying in the land of the Picts with his companions when he encountered local residents burying a man by the River Ness. They explained that the man was swimming in the river when he was attacked by a \"water beast\" that mauled him and dragged him underwater despite their attempts to rescue him by boat. Columba sent a follower, Luigne moccu Min, to swim across the river. The beast approached him, but Columba made the sign of the cross and said: \"Go no further. Do not touch the man. Go back at once.\" The creature stopped as if it had been \"pulled back with ropes\" and fled, and Columba's men and the Picts gave thanks for what they perceived as a miracle.\nBelievers in the monster point to this story, set in the River Ness rather than the loch itself, as evidence for the creature's existence as early as the 6th century. Skeptics question the narrative's reliability, noting that water-beast stories were extremely common in medieval hagiographies, and Adomn\u00e1n's tale probably recycles a common motif attached to a local landmark. According to skeptics, Adomn\u00e1n's story may be independent of the modern Loch Ness Monster legend and became attached to it by proximity and by believers seeking to bolster their claims. Ronald Binns considers that this is the most serious of various alleged early sightings of the monster, but all other claimed sightings before 1933 are dubious and do not prove a monster tradition before that date. Christopher Cairney uses a specific historical and cultural analysis of Adomn\u00e1n to separate Adomn\u00e1n's story about St. Columba from the modern myth of the Loch Ness Monster, but finds an earlier and culturally significant use of Celtic \"water beast\" folklore along the way. In doing so he also discredits any strong connection between kelpies or water-horses and the modern \"media-augmented\" creation of the Loch Ness Monster. He also concludes that the story of Saint Columba may have been impacted by earlier Irish myths about the Caor\u00e1nach and an Oilliph\u00e9ist.\nD. Mackenzie (1871 or 1872).\nIn October 1871 (or 1872), D. Mackenzie of Balnain reportedly saw an object resembling a log or an upturned boat \"wriggling and churning up the water,\" moving slowly at first before disappearing at a faster speed. The account was not published until 1934, when Mackenzie sent his story in a letter to Rupert Gould shortly after popular interest in the monster increased.\nAlexander Macdonald (1888).\nIn 1888, mason Alexander Macdonald of Abriachan sighted \"a large stubby-legged animal\" surfacing from the loch and propelling itself within of the shore where Macdonald stood. Macdonald reported his sighting to Loch Ness water bailiff Alex Campbell, and described the creature as looking like a salamander.\nAldie Mackay (1933).\nThe best-known article that first attracted a great deal of attention about a creature was published on 2 May 1933 in \"The Inverness Courier\", about a large \"beast\" or \"whale-like fish\". The article by Alex Campbell, water bailiff for Loch Ness and a part-time journalist, discussed a sighting by Aldie Mackay of an enormous creature with the body of a whale rolling in the water in the loch while she and her husband John were driving on the A82 on 15 April 1933. The word \"monster\" was reportedly applied for the first time in Campbell's article, although some reports claim that it was coined by editor Evan Barron.\n\"The Courier\" in 2017 published excerpts from the Campbell article, which had been titled \"Strange Spectacle in Loch Ness\". \"The creature disported itself, rolling and plunging for fully a minute, its body resembling that of a whale, and the water cascading and churning like a simmering cauldron. Soon, however, it disappeared in a boiling mass of foam. Both onlookers confessed that there was something uncanny about the whole thing, for they realised that here was no ordinary denizen of the depths, because, apart from its enormous size, the beast, in taking the final plunge, sent out waves that were big enough to have been caused by a passing steamer.\"\nAccording to a 2013 article, Mackay said that she had yelled, \"Stop! The Beast!\" when viewing the spectacle. In the late 1980s, a naturalist interviewed Aldie Mackay and she admitted to knowing that there had been an oral tradition of a \"beast\" in the loch well before her claimed sighting. Alex Campbell's 1933 article also stated that \"Loch Ness has for generations been credited with being the home of a fearsome-looking monster\".\nGeorge Spicer (1933).\nModern interest in the monster was sparked by a sighting on 22 July 1933, when George Spicer and his wife saw \"a most extraordinary form of animal\" cross the road in front of their car. They described the creature as having a large body (about high and long) and a long, wavy, narrow neck, slightly thicker than an elephant's trunk and as long as the width of the road. They saw no limbs. It lurched across the road toward the loch away, leaving a trail of broken undergrowth in its wake. Spicer described it as \"the nearest approach to a dragon or pre-historic animal that I have ever seen in my life,\" and as having \"a long neck, which moved up and down in the manner of a scenic railway.\" It had \"an animal\" in its mouth and had a body that \"was fairly big, with a high back, but if there were any feet they must have been of the web kind, and as for a tail I cannot say, as it moved so rapidly, and when we got to the spot it had probably disappeared into the loch.\" Though he was the first to describe the creature as a plesiosaur-like dinosaur, evidence suggested by researchers at Columbia University in 2013 proved his story to be fake. The university and Daniel Loxton suggested that Spicer's sighting was fictionalized and inspired by a long-necked dinosaur that rises out of a lake in \"King Kong\", a film that was extremely popular in cinemas in his home city of London during August 1933, when Spicer reported the sighting. Loxton and Donald Prothero later cited \"King Kong\" as evidently an influence on the Loch Ness Monster myth.\nOn 4 August 1933 the \"Courier\" published a report of Spicer's sighting. This sighting triggered a massive amount of public interest and an uptick in alleged sightings, leading to the solidification of the actual name \"Loch Ness Monster.\"\nIt has been claimed that sightings of the monster increased after a road was built along the loch in early 1933, bringing workers and tourists to the formerly isolated area. However, Binns has described this as \"the myth of the lonely loch\", as it was far from isolated before then, due to the construction of the Caledonian Canal. In the 1930s, the existing road by the side of the loch was given a serious upgrade.\nHugh Gray (1933).\nHugh Gray's photograph taken near Foyers on 12 November 1933 was the first photograph alleged to depict the monster. It was slightly blurred, and it has been noted that if one looks closely the head of a dog can be seen. Gray had taken his Labrador for a walk that day and it is suspected that the photograph depicts his dog fetching a stick from the loch. Others have suggested that the photograph depicts an otter or a swan. The original negative was lost. However, in 1963, Maurice Burton came into \"possession of two lantern slides, contact positives from th[e] original negative\" and when projected onto a screen they revealed an \"otter rolling at the surface in characteristic fashion.\"\nArthur Grant (1934).\nOn 5 January 1934 a motorcyclist, Arthur Grant, claimed to have nearly hit the creature while approaching Abriachan (near the north-eastern end of the loch) at about 1\u00a0a.m. on a moonlit night. According to Grant, it had a small head attached to a long neck; the creature saw him, and crossed the road back to the loch. Grant, a veterinary student, described it as a cross between a seal and a plesiosaur. He said he dismounted and followed it to the loch, but saw only ripples.\nGrant produced a sketch of the creature that was examined by zoologist Maurice Burton, who stated it was consistent with the appearance and behavior of an otter. Regarding the long size of the creature reported by Grant, it has been suggested that this was a faulty observation due to the poor light conditions. Paleontologist Darren Naish has suggested that Grant may have seen either an otter or a seal and exaggerated his sighting over time.\n\"Surgeon's photograph\" (1934).\nThe \"surgeon's photograph\" is perhaps the most famous alleged photo of the creature, and the first to portray its head and neck. It is attributed to Robert Kenneth Wilson, a London gynaecologist. On 20 April 1934, multiple British newspapers reported Wilson's claim to have seen the monster while driving near Loch Ness the day before, but the stories do not mention the existence of a photograph. \"Dr. Wilson described the monster as having a small head and a swan-like neck protruding three feet above the surface of the water,\" the \"Western Morning News\" reported.\nThe following day, April 21, the \"Daily Mail\" announced it has purchased exclusive rights to a photo it attributed to \"Mr. Robert Kenneth Wilson, M.A., M.B., Ch.B.Camb., F.R.C.S., of Queen Anne-street, W., who has been touring the Loch Ness countryside.\" Along with the photo, it ran an interview with Wilson about \"his remarkable luck in being able to secure such a photograph.\" Wilson said he was looking at the loch when he saw the monster, grabbed his camera, and snapped four photos. Only two exposures came out clearly; the first reportedly shows a small head and back, and the second shows a similar head in a diving position. The first photo became well known, and the second attracted little publicity because of its blurriness.\nFor 60 years, the photo was considered evidence of the monster's existence, although skeptics dismissed it as driftwood, an elephant, an otter or a bird. The photo's scale was controversial; it is often shown cropped (making the creature seem large and the ripples like waves), while the uncropped shot shows the other end of the loch and the monster in the centre. The ripples in the photo were found to fit the size and pattern of small ripples, rather than large waves photographed up close. Analysis of the original image fostered further doubt. In 1993, the makers of the Discovery Communications documentary \"Loch Ness Discovered\" analyzed the uncropped image and found a white object visible in every version of the photo (implying that it was on the negative). It was believed to be the cause of the ripples, as if the object was being towed, although the possibility of a blemish on the negative could not be ruled out. An analysis of the full photograph indicated that the object was small, about long.\nSince 1994, most agree that the photo was an elaborate hoax. It had been described as fake in a 7 December 1975 \"Sunday Telegraph\" article that fell into obscurity. Details of how the photo was taken were published in the 1999 book, \"Nessie \u2013 the Surgeon's Photograph Exposed\", which contains a facsimile of the 1975 \"Sunday Telegraph\" article. The creature was reportedly a toy submarine built by Christian Spurling, the stepson of actor, screenwriter, director, producer, and -- perhaps most saliently -- big-game hunter M. A. Wetherell. Spurling admitted the photograph was a hoax in January 1991. Wetherell had been publicly ridiculed by his employer, the \"Daily Mail\", after he found \"Nessie footprints\" that turned out to be a hoax. To get revenge on the \"Mail\", Wetherell perpetrated his hoax with co-conspirators Spurling (sculpture specialist), Ian Colin Marmaduke Wetherell (his son, himself a future actor, who bought the material for the fake), and Maurice Chambers (an insurance agent). \nThe toy submarine was bought from F. W. Woolworth, and its head and neck were made from wood putty. After testing it in a local pond the group went to Loch Ness, where Ian Marmaduke Wetherell took the photos near the Altsaigh Tea House. When they heard a water bailiff approaching, Wetherell sank the model with his foot and it is \"presumably still somewhere in Loch Ness\". Chambers gave the photographic plates to Wilson, a friend of his who enjoyed \"a good practical joke\". Wilson brought the plates to Ogston's, an Inverness chemist, and gave them to George Morrison for development. He sold the first photo to the \"Daily Mail\", who then announced that the monster had been photographed.\nLittle is known of the second photo; it is often ignored by researchers, who believe its quality too poor and its differences from the first photo too great to warrant analysis. It shows a head similar to the first photo, with a more turbulent wave pattern, and possibly taken at a different time and location in the loch. Some believe it to be an earlier, cruder attempt at a hoax, and others (including Roy Mackal and Maurice Burton) consider it a picture of a diving bird or otter that Wilson mistook for the monster. According to Morrison, when the plates were developed, Wilson was uninterested in the second photo; he allowed Morrison to keep the negative, and the photo was rediscovered years later. When asked about the second photo by the \"Ness Information Service Newsletter\", Spurling \"...\u00a0was vague, thought it might have been a piece of wood they were trying out as a monster, but [was] not sure.\"\nTaylor film (1938).\nOn 29 May 1938, South African tourist G. E. Taylor filmed something in the loch for three minutes on 16\u00a0mm colour film. The film was obtained by popular science writer Maurice Burton, who did not show it to other researchers. A single frame was published in his 1961 book, \"The Elusive Monster\". His analysis concluded it was a floating object, not an animal.\nWilliam Fraser (1938).\nOn 15 August 1938, William Fraser, chief constable of Inverness-shire, wrote a letter that the monster existed beyond doubt and expressed concern about a hunting party that had arrived (with a custom-made harpoon gun) determined to catch the monster \"dead or alive\". He believed his power to protect the monster from the hunters was \"very doubtful\". The letter was released by the National Archives of Scotland on 27 April 2010.\nSonar readings (1954).\nIn December 1954, sonar readings were taken by the fishing boat \"Rival III\". Its crew noted a large object keeping pace with the vessel at a depth of . It was detected for before contact was lost and regained. Previous sonar attempts were inconclusive or negative.\nPeter MacNab (1955).\nPeter MacNab at Urquhart Castle on 29 July 1955 took a photograph that depicted two long black humps in the water. The photograph was not made public until it appeared in Constance Whyte's 1957 book on the subject. On 23 October 1958 it was published by the \"Weekly Scotsman\". Author Ronald Binns wrote that the \"phenomenon which MacNab photographed could easily be a wave effect resulting from three trawlers travelling closely together up the loch.\"\nOther researchers consider the photograph a hoax. Roy Mackal requested to use the photograph in his 1976 book. He received the original negative from MacNab, but discovered it differed from the photograph that appeared in Whyte's book. The tree at the bottom left in Whyte's was missing from the negative. It is suspected that the photograph was doctored by re-photographing a print.\nDinsdale film (1960).\nAeronautical engineer Tim Dinsdale filmed what he believed to be a dark hump that left a wake crossing Loch Ness on 23 April 1960. Dinsdale, who reportedly had the sighting on his final day of search, described it as mahogany red with a blotch on its side when viewed through binoculars. He said that when he mounted his camera the object began to move, and he shot of film. According to the Joint Air Reconnaissance Intelligence Centre (JARIC) who published a 1966 report analyzing the film, the object was \"probably animate\". After the film, Dinsdale continued to pursue finding the Loch Ness Monster but while he claimed to have had additional sightings he was unable to produce more photographic evidence.\nIn 1993, Discovery Communications produced a documentary, \"Loch Ness Discovered\", with a digital enhancement of the Dinsdale film. A person who enhanced the film noticed a shadow in the negative that was not obvious in the developed film. By enhancing and overlaying frames, he found what appeared to be the rear body of a creature underwater: \"Before I saw the film, I thought the Loch Ness Monster was a load of rubbish. Having done the enhancement, I'm not so sure.\"\nHowever, additional analyses of the Dinsdale film have indicated that his sighting was a case of mistaken identity and that he likely filmed a boat under poor lighting conditions. Although Dinsdale attempted to rule this out by organizing for a fishing boat to sail a similar route later that morning, this comparison was filmed under different lighting conditions, with a white boat. JARIC's estimates of the size and speed of the object are now believed to be overestimates, due to miscalculations of the angle of the camera and cuts in the film, and overlaying multiple frames seems to show a pale blob towards the rear end of the object, which appears in multiple frames and matches with the position of the helmsman of a boat as demonstrated in Dinsdale's boat comparison. It has also been noted that the object in his film does not actually submerge as often perceived but blends into the greyer reflections on the water. Additionally, Dick Raynor has noted that Dinsdale's binoculars were actually a wider field of view than his telephoto camera. Additionally, critics consider the dark shape noticed by the Discovery documentary analysis unlikely to be the shadow or a body underwater due to the low angle of view, and it is more likely to be reflections of the shore behind the object.\nAlthough most researchers do not believe Dinsdale to be a hoaxer, his susceptibility to confirmation bias and trusting dubious sources as evidence has been criticized.\n\"Loch Ness Muppet\" (1977).\nOn 21 May 1977, Anthony \"Doc\" Shiels, camping next to Urquhart Castle, took what were alleged to be the clearest picture of the monster then available. Shiels, a magician, claimed to have summoned the animal out of the water. He later described it as an \"elephant squid\", claiming the long neck shown in the photograph is the squid's \"trunk\" and that a white spot at the base of the neck is its eye. Due to the lack of ripples and translucent look, it has been declared a hoax by many people and received its name because of its staged look.\nHolmes video (2007).\nOn 26 May 2007, 55-year-old laboratory technician Gordon Holmes videotaped what he said was \"this jet black thing, about long, moving fairly fast in the water.\", Loch Ness monster watchers described it as among \"the best footage ever seen.\" BBC Scotland broadcast the video on 29 May 2007. \"STV News North Tonight\" aired it on 28 May 2007 and interviewed Holmes. Adrian Shine, a marine biologist at the Loch Ness 2000 Centre in Drumnadrochit, suggested that the footage was an otter, seal or water bird.\nSonar image (2011).\nOn 24 August 2011, Loch Ness boat captain Marcus Atkinson photographed a sonar image of a , unidentified object that seemed to follow his boat for two minutes at a depth of and ruled out the possibility of a small fish or seal. In April 2012, a scientist from the National Oceanography Centre said that the image is a bloom of algae and zooplankton.\nGeorge Edwards photograph (2011).\nOn 3 August 2012, skipper George Edwards claimed that a photo he took on 2 November 2011 shows \"Nessie\". Edwards claims to have searched for the monster for 26 years, and reportedly spent 60 hours per week on the loch aboard his boat, \"Nessie Hunter IV\", taking tourists for rides. Edwards said, \"In my opinion, it probably looks kind of like a manatee, but not a mammal. When people see three humps, they're probably just seeing three separate monsters.\"\nOther researchers have questioned the photograph's authenticity, and Loch Ness researcher Steve Feltham suggested that the object in the water is a fibreglass hump used in a National Geographic Channel documentary in which Edwards had participated. Researcher Dick Raynor has questioned Edwards' claim of discovering a deeper bottom of Loch Ness, which Raynor calls \"Edwards Deep\". He found inconsistencies between Edwards' claims for the location and conditions of the photograph and the actual location and weather conditions that day. According to Raynor, Edwards told him he had faked a photograph in 1986 that he claimed was genuine in the National Geographic documentary. Although Edwards admitted in October 2013 that his 2011 photograph was a hoax, he insisted that the 1986 photograph was genuine.\nA survey of the literature about other supposed sightings, including photographs, published in \"The Scientific American\" blog network on 10 July 2013, indicates none of them are actual sightings.\nDavid Elder video (2013).\nOn 27 August 2013, tourist David Elder presented a five-minute video of a \"mysterious wave\" in the loch. According to Elder, the wave was produced by a \"solid black object\" just under the surface of the water. Elder, 50, from East Kilbride, South Lanarkshire, was taking a picture of a swan at the Fort Augustus pier on the south-western end of the loch, when he captured the movement. He said, \"The water was very still at the time and there were no ripples coming off the wave and no other activity on the water.\" Sceptics suggested that the wave may have been caused by a wind gust.\nApple Maps photograph (2014).\nOn 19 April 2014, it was reported that a satellite image on Apple Maps showed what appeared to be a large creature (thought by some to be the Loch Ness Monster) just below the surface of Loch Ness. At the loch's far north, the image appeared about long. Possible explanations were the wake of a boat (with the boat itself lost in image stitching or low contrast), seal-caused ripples, or floating wood.\nDrone footage (2021).\nIn September 2021, it was reported that a creature was captured on a live-stream near the loch, though it was quickly described as a digitally altered video by skepticists due to the lack of natural movement, an unlikely degree of illumination, and its resemblance to a stock image of a 'toy plesiosaurus'.\nSearches.\nEdward Mountain expedition (1934).\nAfter reading Rupert Gould's \"The Loch Ness Monster and Others\", Edward Mountain financed a search. Twenty men with binoculars and cameras positioned themselves around the loch from 9\u00a0am to 6\u00a0pm for five weeks, beginning on 13 July 1934. Although 21 photographs were taken, none was considered conclusive. Supervisor James Fraser remained by the loch, filming, on 15 September 1934; the film is now lost. Zoologists and professors of natural history concluded that the film showed a seal, possibly a grey seal.\nLoch Ness Phenomena Investigation Bureau (1962\u20131972).\nThe \"Loch Ness Phenomena Investigation Bureau\" (LNPIB) was a UK-based society formed in 1962 by Norman Collins, R. S. R. Fitter, politician David James, Peter Scott and Constance Whyte \"to study Loch Ness to identify the creature known as the Loch Ness Monster or determine the causes of reports of it\". In 1967 it received a grant of $20,000 from World Book Encyclopedia to fund a 2-year programme of daylight watches from May to October. The principal equipment was 35\u00a0mm movie cameras on mobile units with 20-inch lenses, and one with a 36-inch lens at Achnahannet, near the midpoint of the loch. With the mobile units in laybys about 80% of the loch surface was covered. The society's name was later shortened to the Loch Ness Investigation Bureau (LNIB), and it disbanded in 1972. The LNIB had an annual subscription charge, which covered administration. Its main activity was encouraging groups of self-funded volunteers to watch the loch from vantage points with film cameras with telescopic lenses. From 1965 to 1972 it had a caravan camp and viewing platform at Achnahannet, and sent observers to other locations up and down the loch. According to the bureau's 1969 annual report it had 1,030 members, of whom 588 were from the UK.\nSonar study (1967\u20131968).\nD. Gordon Tucker, chair of the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering at the University of Birmingham, volunteered his services as a sonar developer and expert at Loch Ness in 1968. His gesture, part of a larger effort led by the LNPIB from 1967 to 1968, involved collaboration between volunteers and professionals in a number of fields. Tucker had chosen Loch Ness as the test site for a prototype sonar transducer with a maximum range of . The device was fixed underwater at Temple Pier in Urquhart Bay and directed at the opposite shore, drawing an acoustic \"net\" across the loch through which no moving object could pass undetected. During the two-week trial in August, multiple targets were identified. One was probably a shoal of fish, but others moved in a way not typical of shoals at speeds up to 10 knots.\nRobert Rines studies (1972, 1975, 2001, 2008).\nIn 1972, a group of researchers from the Academy of Applied Science led by Robert H. Rines conducted a search for the monster involving sonar examination of the loch depths for unusual activity. Rines took precautions to avoid murky water with floating wood and peat. A submersible camera with a floodlight was deployed to record images below the surface. If Rines detected anything on the sonar, he turned the light on and took pictures.\nOn 8 August, Rines' Raytheon DE-725C sonar unit, operating at a frequency of 200\u00a0kHz and anchored at a depth of , identified a moving target (or targets) estimated by echo strength at in length. Specialists from Raytheon, Simrad (now Kongsberg Maritime), Hydroacoustics, Marty Klein of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Klein Associates (a side-scan sonar producer) and Ira Dyer of MIT's Department of Ocean Engineering were on hand to examine the data. P. Skitzki of Raytheon suggested that the data indicated a protuberance projecting from one of the echoes. According to author Roy Mackal, the shape was a \"highly flexible laterally flattened tail\" or the misinterpreted return from two animals swimming together.\nConcurrent with the sonar readings, the floodlit camera obtained a pair of underwater photographs. Both depicted what appeared to be a rhomboid flipper, although sceptics have dismissed the images as depicting the bottom of the loch, air bubbles, a rock, or a fish fin. The apparent flipper was photographed in different positions, indicating movement. The first flipper photo is better-known than the second, and both were enhanced and retouched from the original negatives. According to team member Charles Wyckoff, the photos were retouched to superimpose the flipper; the original enhancement showed a considerably less-distinct object. No one is sure how the originals were altered. During a meeting with Tony Harmsworth and Adrian Shine at the Loch Ness Centre &amp; Exhibition, Rines admitted that the flipper photo may have been retouched by a magazine editor.\nBritish naturalist Peter Scott announced in 1975, on the basis of the photographs, that the creature's scientific name would be \"Nessiteras rhombopteryx\" (Greek for \"Ness inhabitant with diamond-shaped fin\"). Scott intended that the name would enable the creature to be added to the British register of protected wildlife. Scottish politician Nicholas Fairbairn called the name an anagram for \"Monster hoax by Sir Peter S\". However, Rines countered that when rearranged, the letters could also spell \"Yes, both pix are monsters \u2013 R.\"\nAnother sonar contact was made, this time with two objects estimated to be about . The strobe camera photographed two large objects surrounded by a flurry of bubbles. Some interpreted the objects as two plesiosaur-like animals, suggesting several large animals living in Loch Ness. This photograph has rarely been published.\nA second search was conducted by Rines in 1975. Some of the photographs, despite their obviously murky quality and lack of concurrent sonar readings, did indeed seem to show unknown animals in various positions and lightings. One photograph appeared to show the head, neck, and upper torso of a plesiosaur-like animal, but sceptics argue the object is a log due to the lump on its \"chest\" area, the mass of sediment in the full photo, and the object's log-like \"skin\" texture. Another photograph seemed to depict a horned \"gargoyle head\", consistent with that of some sightings of the monster; however, sceptics point out that a tree stump was later filmed during Operation Deepscan in 1987, which bore a striking resemblance to the gargoyle head.\nIn 2001, Rines' Academy of Applied Science videotaped a V-shaped wake traversing still water on a calm day. The academy also videotaped an object on the floor of the loch resembling a carcass and found marine clamshells and a fungus-like organism not normally found in freshwater lochs, a suggested connection to the sea and a possible entry for the creature.\nIn 2008, Rines theorised that the creature may have become extinct, citing the lack of significant sonar readings and a decline in eyewitness accounts. He undertook a final expedition, using sonar and an underwater camera in an attempt to find a carcass. Rines believed that the animals may have failed to adapt to temperature changes resulting from global warming.\nOperation Deepscan (1987).\nOperation Deepscan was conducted in 1987. Twenty-four boats equipped with echo sounding equipment were deployed across the width of the loch, and simultaneously sent acoustic waves. According to BBC News the scientists had made sonar contact with an unidentified object of unusual size and strength. The researchers returned, re-scanning the area. Analysis of the echosounder images seemed to indicate debris at the bottom of the loch, although there was motion in three of the pictures. Adrian Shine speculated, based on size, that they might be seals that had entered the loch.\nSonar expert Darrell Lowrance, founder of Lowrance Electronics, donated a number of echosounder units used in the operation. After examining a sonar return indicating a large, moving object at a depth of near Urquhart Bay, Lowrance said: \"There's something here that we don't understand, and there's something here that's larger than a fish, maybe some species that hasn't been detected before. I don't know.\"\n\"Searching for the Loch Ness Monster\" (2003).\nIn 2003, the BBC sponsored a search of the loch using 600 sonar beams and satellite tracking. The search had sufficient resolution to identify a small buoy. No animal of substantial size was found and, despite their reported hopes, the scientists involved admitted that this proved the Loch Ness Monster was a myth. \"Searching for the Loch Ness Monster\" aired on BBC One.\nAdrian Shine and Kongsberg Maritime (2016).\nAdrian Shine of The Loch Ness Project and VisitScotland supported a survey of the Loch using an underwater robot operated by Kongsberg Maritime. While investigating the depths of the loch, they found the resting place of a Nessie prop created for Billy Wilder's 1970 film \"The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes\". Wally Veevers had designed the prop initially with a neck and two humps but Wilder disliked the humps and ordered them removed. This change altered the buoyancy and the prop promptly sank into the loch during a filming test.\nDNA survey (2018).\nAn international team consisting of researchers from the universities of Otago, Copenhagen, Hull and the Highlands and Islands, did a DNA survey of the lake in June 2018, looking for unusual species. The results were published in 2019; no DNA of large fish such as sharks, sturgeons and catfish could be found. No otter or seal DNA were obtained either, though there was a lot of eel DNA. The leader of the study, Prof Neil Gemmell of the University of Otago, said he could not rule out the possibility of eels of extreme size, though none were found, nor were any ever caught. The other possibility is that the large amount of eel DNA simply comes from many small eels. No evidence of any reptilian sequences were found, he added, \"so I think we can be fairly sure that there is probably not a giant scaly reptile swimming around in Loch Ness\".\nHigh-Tech 2023 90th Anniversary Search.\nIn August 2023, a weekend of high-tech searching was done in observance of the 90th anniversary of the 1933 Aldie Mackay sighting. The event was coordinated by Loch Ness Exploration volunteers in collaboration with the Loch Ness visitor\u2019s centre. The technology used included \"sonar for mapping the loch bed; thermal imaging drones to scan the surface; and hydrophones (underwater microphones)\" which did record some sounds, but were \"probably ducks\". Despite a large turnout of searchers onsite and hundreds more viewing Internet livestream cameras pointed at the loch, there were no conclusive sightings.\nExplanations.\nA number of explanations have been suggested to account for sightings of the creature. According to Ronald Binns, a former member of the Loch Ness Phenomena Investigation Bureau, there is probably no single explanation of the monster. Binns wrote two skeptical books, the 1983 \"The Loch Ness Mystery Solved\", and his 2017 \"The Loch Ness Mystery Reloaded\". In these he contends that an aspect of human psychology is the ability of the eye to see what it wants, and expects, to see. They may be categorised as misidentifications of known animals, misidentifications of inanimate objects or effects, reinterpretations of Scottish folklore, hoaxes, and exotic species of large animals. A reviewer wrote that Binns had \"evolved into the author of ... the definitive, skeptical book on the subject\". Binns does not call the sightings a hoax, but \"a myth in the true sense of the term\" and states that the \"'monster is a sociological ... phenomenon. ...After 1983 the search ... (for the) possibility that there just \"might\" be continues to enthrall a small number for whom eye-witness evidence outweighs all other considerations\".\nMisidentification of known animals.\nEels.\nA large European eel was an early suggestion for what the \"monster\" was. Eels are found in Loch Ness, and an unusually large one would explain many sightings. Dinsdale dismissed the hypothesis because eels undulate side to side like snakes. Sightings in 1856 of a \"sea-serpent\" (or kelpie) in a freshwater lake near Leurbost in the Outer Hebrides were explained as those of an oversized eel, also believed common in \"Highland lakes\".\nFrom 2018 to 2019, scientists from New Zealand undertook a massive project to document every organism in Loch Ness based on DNA samples. Their reports confirmed that European eels are still found in the Loch. No DNA samples were found for large animals such as catfish, Greenland sharks, or plesiosaurs. Many scientists now believe that giant eels account for many, if not most of the sightings.\nElephant.\nIn a 1979 article, California biologist Dennis Power and geographer Donald Johnson claimed that the \"surgeon's photograph\" was the top of the head, extended trunk and flared nostrils of a swimming elephant photographed elsewhere and claimed to be from Loch Ness. In 2006, palaeontologist and artist Neil Clark suggested that travelling circuses might have allowed elephants to bathe in the loch; the trunk could be the perceived head and neck, with the head and back the perceived humps. In support of this, Clark provided an example painting.\nGreenland shark.\nZoologist, angler and television presenter Jeremy Wade investigated the creature in 2013 as part of the series \"River Monsters\", and concluded that it is a Greenland shark. The Greenland shark, which can reach up to 20 feet in length, inhabits the North Atlantic Ocean around Canada, Greenland, Iceland, Norway, and possibly Scotland. It is dark in colour, with a small dorsal fin. According to biologist Bruce Wright, the Greenland shark could survive in fresh water (possibly using rivers and lakes to find food) and Loch Ness has an abundance of salmon and other fish.\nWels catfish.\nIn July 2015 three news outlets reported that Steve Feltham, after a vigil at the loch that was recognized by the Guinness Book of Records, theorised that the monster is an unusually large specimen of Wels catfish (\"Silurus glanis\"), which may have been released during the late 19th century.\nOther resident animals.\nIt is difficult to judge the size of an object in water through a telescope or binoculars with no external reference. Loch Ness has resident otters, and photos of them and deer swimming in the loch, which were cited by author Ronald Binns, may have been misinterpreted. According to Binns, birds may be mistaken for a \"head and neck\" sighting.\nMisidentifications of inanimate objects or effects.\nBoat wakes.\nWakes have been reported when the loch is calm, with no boats nearby. Bartender David Munro reported a wake he believed was a creature zigzagging, diving, and reappearing; there were reportedly 26 other witnesses from a nearby car park. Although some sightings describe a V-shaped wake similar to a boat's, others report something not conforming to the shape of a boat.\nTrees.\nIn 1933, the \"Daily Mirror\" published a picture with the caption: \"This queerly-shaped tree-trunk, washed ashore at Foyers [on Loch Ness] may, it is thought, be responsible for the reported appearance of a 'Monster'\". \nIn a 1982 series of articles for \"New Scientist\", Maurice Burton proposed that sightings of Nessie and similar creatures may be fermenting Scots pine logs rising to the surface of the loch. A decomposing log could not initially release gases caused by decay because of its high resin level. Gas pressure would eventually rupture a resin seal at one end of the log, propelling it through the water (sometimes to the surface). According to Burton, the shape of tree logs (with their branch stumps) closely resembles descriptions of the monster.\nSeiches and wakes.\nLoch Ness, because of its long, straight shape, is subject to unusual ripples affecting its surface. A seiche is a large oscillation of a lake, caused by water reverting to its natural level after being blown to one end of the lake (resulting in a standing wave); the Loch Ness oscillation period is 31.5\u00a0minutes. Earthquakes in Scotland are too weak to cause observable seiches, but extremely massive earthquakes far away could cause large waves. The seiche created in Loch Ness by the catastrophic 1755 Lisbon earthquake was reportedly \"so violent as to threaten destruction to some houses built on the sides of it\", while the 1761 aftershock caused two-foot (60\u00a0cm) waves. However, no sightings of the monster were reported in 1755.\nOptical effects.\nWind conditions can give a choppy, matt appearance to the water with calm patches appearing dark from the shore (reflecting the mountains and clouds). In 1979, W. H. Lehn showed that atmospheric refraction could distort the shape and size of objects and animals, and later published a photograph of a mirage of a rock on Lake Winnipeg that resembled a head and neck.\nSeismic gas.\nItalian geologist Luigi Piccardi has proposed geological explanations for ancient legends and myths. Piccardi noted that in the earliest recorded sighting of a creature (the \"Life of Saint Columba\"), the creature's emergence was accompanied \"cum ingenti fremitu\" (\"with loud roaring\"). The Loch Ness is along the Great Glen Fault, and this could be a description of an earthquake. Many reports consist only of a large disturbance on the surface of the water; this could be a release of gas through the fault, although it may be mistaken for something swimming below the surface.\nFolklore.\nIn 1980 Swedish naturalist and author Bengt Sj\u00f6gren wrote that present beliefs in lake monsters such as the Loch Ness Monster are associated with kelpie legends. According to Sj\u00f6gren, accounts of loch monsters have changed over time; originally describing horse-like creatures, they were intended to keep children away from the loch. Sj\u00f6gren wrote that the kelpie legends have developed into descriptions reflecting a modern awareness of plesiosaurs.\nThe kelpie as a water horse in Loch Ness was mentioned in an 1879 Scottish newspaper, and inspired Tim Dinsdale's \"Project Water Horse\". A study of pre-1933 Highland folklore references to kelpies, water horses and water bulls indicated that Ness was the loch most frequently cited.\nHoaxes.\nA number of hoax attempts have been made, some of which were successful. Other hoaxes were revealed rather quickly by the perpetrators or exposed after diligent research. A few examples follow.\nIn August 1933, Italian journalist Francesco Gasparini submitted what he said was the first news article on the Loch Ness Monster. In 1959, he reported sighting a \"strange fish\" and fabricated eyewitness accounts: \"I had the inspiration to get hold of the item about the strange fish. The idea of the monster had never dawned on me, but then I noted that the strange fish would not yield a long article, and I decided to promote the imaginary being to the rank of monster without further ado.\"\nIn the 1930s, big-game hunter Marmaduke Wetherell went to Loch Ness to look for the monster. Wetherell claimed to have found footprints, but when casts of the footprints were sent to scientists for analysis they turned out to be from a hippopotamus; a prankster had used a hippopotamus-foot umbrella stand.\nIn 1972, a team of zoologists from Yorkshire's Flamingo Park Zoo, searching for the monster, discovered a large body floating in the water. The corpse, long and weighing as much as 1.5 tonnes, was described by the Press Association as having \"a bear's head and a brown scaly body with clawlike fins.\" The creature was placed in a van to be carried away for testing, but police seized the cadaver under an act of parliament prohibiting the removal of \"unidentified creatures\" from Loch Ness. It was later revealed that Flamingo Park education officer John Shields shaved the whiskers and otherwise disfigured a bull elephant seal that had died the week before and dumped it in Loch Ness to dupe his colleagues.\nOn 2 July 2003, Gerald McSorely discovered a fossil, supposedly from the creature, when he tripped and fell into the loch. After examination, it was clear that the fossil had been planted.\nIn 2004, a Five TV documentary team, using cinematic special-effects experts, tried to convince people that there was something in the loch. They constructed an animatronic model of a plesiosaur, calling it \"Lucy\". Despite setbacks (including Lucy falling to the bottom of the loch), about 600 sightings were reported where she was placed.\nIn 2005, two students claimed to have found a large tooth embedded in the body of a deer on the loch shore. They publicised the find, setting up a website, but expert analysis soon revealed that the \"tooth\" was the antler of a muntjac. The tooth was a publicity stunt to promote a horror novel by Steve Alten, \"The Loch.\"\nExotic large-animal species.\nPlesiosaur.\nIn 1933, it was suggested that the creature \"bears a striking resemblance to the supposedly extinct plesiosaur\", a long-necked aquatic reptile that became extinct during the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event. A popular explanation at the time, the following arguments have been made against it:\nIn response to these criticisms, Tim Dinsdale, Peter Scott and Roy Mackal postulate a trapped marine creature that evolved from a plesiosaur directly or by convergent evolution. Robert Rines explained that the \"horns\" in some sightings function as breathing tubes (or nostrils), allowing it to breathe without breaking the surface. Newer discoveries of plesiosaurs such as Leptocleididae could handle fresh water, along with Morturneria which thrived in Antarctic waters. While this supports the idea that a Plesiosaur could handle the environment of Loch Ness, it doesn't support the idea that Nessie is one.\nLong-necked giant amphibian.\nR. T. Gould suggested a long-necked newt; Roy Mackal examined the possibility, giving it the highest score (88 percent) on his list of possible candidates.\nInvertebrate.\nIn 1968 F. W. Holiday proposed that Nessie and other lake monsters, such as Morag, may be a large invertebrate such as a bristleworm; he cited the extinct \"Tullimonstrum\" as an example of the shape. According to Holiday, this explains the land sightings and the variable back shape; he likened it to the medieval description of dragons as \"worms\". Although this theory was considered by Mackal, he found it less convincing than eels, amphibians or plesiosaurs.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17878", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17878", "title": "Laser science", "text": "Branch of optics\nLaser science or laser physics is a branch of optics that describes the theory and practice of lasers.\nLaser science is principally concerned with quantum electronics, laser construction, optical cavity design, the physics of producing a population inversion in laser media, and the temporal evolution of the light field in the laser. It is also concerned with the physics of laser beam propagation, particularly the physics of Gaussian beams, with laser applications, and with associated fields such as nonlinear optics and quantum optics.\nHistory.\nLaser science predates the invention of the laser itself. Albert Einstein created the foundations for the laser and maser in 1917, via a paper in which he re-derived Max Planck\u2019s law of radiation using a formalism based on probability coefficients (Einstein coefficients) for the absorption, spontaneous emission, and stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation. The existence of stimulated emission was confirmed in 1928 by Rudolf W. Ladenburg. In 1939, Valentin A. Fabrikant made the earliest laser proposal. He specified the conditions required for light amplification using stimulated emission. In 1947, Willis E. Lamb and R. C. Retherford found apparent stimulated emission in hydrogen spectra and effected the first demonstration of stimulated emission; in 1950, Alfred Kastler (Nobel Prize for Physics 1966) proposed the method of optical pumping, experimentally confirmed, two years later, by Brossel, Kastler, and Winter.\nThe theoretical principles describing the operation of a microwave laser (a maser) were first described by Nikolay Basov and Alexander Prokhorov at the \"All-Union Conference on Radio Spectroscopy\" in May 1952. The first maser was built by Charles H. Townes, James P. Gordon, and Herbert J. Zeiger in 1953. Townes, Basov and Prokhorov were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1964 for their research in the field of stimulated emission. Arthur Ashkin, G\u00e9rard Mourou, and Donna Strickland were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2018 for groundbreaking inventions in the field of laser physics.\nThe first working laser (a pulsed ruby laser) was demonstrated on May 16, 1960, by Theodore Maiman at the Hughes Research Laboratories.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17879", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17879", "title": "List of Latin proverbs", "text": ""}
{"id": "17880", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17880", "title": "Lincoln, England", "text": "Cathedral city in Lincolnshire, England\nLincoln () is a cathedral city and district in Lincolnshire, England, of which it is the county town. In the 2021 Census, the city's district had a population of 103,813. The 2021 census gave the urban area of Lincoln, including Bracebridge Heath, North Hykeham, South Hykeham and Waddington, a recorded population of 127,540.\nRoman \"Lindum Colonia\" developed from an Iron Age settlement of Britons on the River Witham, near the Fosse Way road. Over time its name was shortened to Lincoln, after successive settlements, including by Anglo-Saxons and Danes. Landmarks include Lincoln Cathedral (English Gothic architecture; for over 200 years the world's tallest building) and the 11th-century Norman Lincoln Castle. The city hosts the University of Lincoln, Lincoln Bishop University, Lincoln City F.C. and Lincoln United F.C. Lincoln is the largest settlement in Lincolnshire, with the towns of Grimsby second largest and Scunthorpe third.\nToponymy.\nThe name Lincoln may ultimately come from the Brythonic language of Iron Age Britain's Celtic inhabitants name for the area: \"lindon\", \"The Pool\", via Latin \"Lindum Col\u014dnia\" whence the latter part of the name \u2018-coln\u2019 (\u201coutpost\u201d), presumably referring to Brayford Pool (compare the etymology of Dublin, from the Gaelic \"dubh linn\" \"black pool\u201d). The extent of the original settlement is unknown, as its remains are buried beneath the later Roman and medieval ruins and modern Lincoln.\nHistory.\nEarliest history.\nThe earliest origins of Lincoln can be traced to remains of an Iron Age settlement of round wooden dwellings, discovered by archaeologists in 1972, which have been dated to the 1st century BCE. It was built by Brayford Pool on the River Witham at the foot of a large hill, on which the Normans later built Lincoln Cathedral and Lincoln Castle.\nLindum Colonia.\nThe Romans conquered this part of Britain in 48 CE and soon built a legionary fortress high on a hill overlooking the natural lake, Brayford Pool, formed by the widening of the River Witham, and the northern end of the Fosse Way Roman road (A46). Celtic \"Lindon\" was later Latinised to \"Lindum\" and the title \"Colonia\" added when it became settled by army veterans.\nThe conversion to a \"colonia\" occurred when the legion moved on to York (\"Eboracum\") in 71 CE. Lindum colonia or more fully, Colonia Domitiana Lindensium, after the then Emperor Domitian, was set up within the walls of the hilltop fortress by extending it with about an equal area, down the hillside to the waterside.\nIt became a flourishing settlement accessible from the sea through the River Trent and through the River Witham. On the basis of a patently corrupt list of British bishops said to have attended the 314 Council of Arles, the city is often seen as having been the capital of the province of Flavia Caesariensis, formed during the late 3rd-century Diocletian Reforms. Subsequently, the town and its waterways declined. By the close of the 5th century, it was largely deserted, although some occupation continued under a \"Praefectus Civitatis\" \u2013 Saint Paulinus visited a man holding this office in Lincoln in 629 CE.\nLincylene.\nGermanic tribes from the North Sea area settled Lincolnshire in the 5th to 6th centuries. The Latin \"Lindum Colonia\" shrank in Old English to Lindocolina, then to Lincylene.\nAfter the first Viking raids, the city again rose to some importance with overseas trading ties. In Viking times Lincoln had its own mint, by far the most important in Lincolnshire and by the end of the 10th century, comparable in output to that of York. After establishment of the Danelaw in 886, Lincoln became one of the Five East Midland Boroughs. Excavations at Flaxengate reveal that an area deserted since Roman times received timber-framed buildings fronting a new street system in about 900. Lincoln underwent an economic explosion with the settlement of the Danes. Like York, the Upper City seems to have had purely administrative functions up to 850 or so, while the Lower City, down the hill towards the River Witham, may have been largely deserted. By 950, however, the Witham banks were developed, the Lower City resettled and the suburb of Wigford emerging as a trading centre. In 1068, two years after the Norman conquest of England, William I ordered Lincoln Castle to be built on the site of the old Roman settlement, for the same strategic reasons and controlling the same road, the Fosse Way.\nGreen cloth.\nDuring the Anarchy, in 1141 Lincoln was the site of a battle between King Stephen and the forces of Empress Matilda, led by her illegitimate half-brother Robert, 1st Earl of Gloucester. After fierce fighting in the city streets, Stephen's forces were defeated and Stephen himself captured and taken to Bristol.\nBy 1150, Lincoln was among the wealthiest towns in England, based economically on cloth and wool exported to Flanders; Lincoln weavers had set up a weavers' guild in 1130 to produce Lincoln Cloth, especially the fine dyed \"scarlet\" and \"green\", whose reputation was later enhanced by the legendary Robin Hood wearing woollens of Lincoln green. In the Guildhall, surmounting the city gate called the Stonebow, the ancient Council Chamber contains Lincoln's civic insignia, a fine collection of civic regalia.\nOutside the precincts of cathedral and castle, the old quarter clustered round the Bailgate and down Steep Hill to the High Street and High Bridge, whose half-timbered housing juts out over the river. There are three ancient churches: St Mary le Wigford and St Peter at Gowts, both 11th century in origin, and St Mary Magdalene, from the late 13th century. The last is an unusual English dedication to a saint whose cult was coming into vogue on the European continent at the time.\nLincoln was home to one of five main Jewish communities in England, well established before it was officially noted in 1154. In 1190, anti-Semitic riots that started in King's Lynn, Norfolk, spread to Lincoln; the Jewish community took refuge with royal officials, but their homes were plundered. The so-called House of Aaron has a two-storey street frontage that is essentially 12th century and the nearby Jew's House likewise bears witness to the Jewish population. In 1255, the affair called \"The Libel of Lincoln\" in which prominent Lincoln Jews, accused of ritual murder of a Christian boy (Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln in medieval folklore) were sent to the Tower of London and 18 executed. The Jews were all expelled in 1290.\nThirteenth-century Lincoln was England's third largest city and a favourite of more than one king. In the First Barons' War, it was caught in the strife between the king and rebel barons allied with the French. Here and at Dover the French and Rebel army was defeated. Thereafter the town was pillaged for having sided with Prince Louis. In the Second Barons' War, of 1266, the disinherited rebels attacked the Jews of Lincoln, ransacked the synagogue and burned the records that registered debts.\nDecline, dissolution and damage.\nSome historians have the city's fortunes declining from the 14th century, but others argue that it remained buoyant in trade and communications well into the 15th. In 1409, the city became a county corporate: the County of the City of Lincoln, formerly part of the West Riding of Lindsey since at least the time of the Domesday Book. Additional rights were then conferred by successive monarchs, including those of an assay town (controlling metal manufacturing, for example). The oldest surviving secular drama in English, \"The Interlude of the Student and the Girl\" (c.\u20091300), may have originated from Lincoln.\nLincoln's coat of arms, not officially endorsed by the College of Arms, is believed to date from the 14th century. It is \"Argent on a cross gules a fleur-de-lis or\". The cross is believed to derive from the Diocese. The fleur-de-lis symbolises the cathedral dedication to the Virgin Mary. The motto is CIVITAS LINCOLNIA (\"City of Lincoln\").\nThe dissolution of the monasteries cut Lincoln's main source of diocesan income and dried up the network of patronage controlled by the bishop. Seven monasteries closed in the city alone, as did several nearby abbeys, which further diminished the region's political power. A symbol of Lincoln's economic and political decline came in 1549, when the cathedral's great spire rotted and collapsed and was not replaced. However, the comparative poverty of post-medieval Lincoln preserved pre-medieval structures that would probably have been lost under more prosperous conditions.\nBetween 1642 and 1651 in the English Civil War, Lincoln was on a frontier between the Royalist and Parliamentary forces and changed hands several times. Many buildings were badly damaged. Lincoln now had no major industry and no easy access to the sea. It suffered as the rest of the country was beginning to prosper in the early 18th century, travellers often commenting on what had essentially become a one-street town.\nRevolutions.\nBy the Georgian era, Lincoln's fortunes began to pick up, thanks in part to the Agricultural Revolution. Reopening of the Foss Dyke canal eased imports of coal and other raw materials vital to industry. Along with the economic growth of Lincoln in this period, the city boundaries were spread to include the West Common. To this day, an annual Beat the Boundaries walk takes place along its perimeter.\nCoupled with the arrival of railway links, Lincoln boomed again during the Industrial Revolution, and several famous companies arose, such as Ruston's, Clayton's, Proctor's and William Foster's. Lincoln began to excel in heavy engineering, by building locomotives, steam shovels and all manner of heavy machinery.\nIt was also around this time that the town's name became overshadowed in the world's consciousness by a different meaning of the word \u201cLincoln\u201d: namely, U.S. President Abraham Lincoln, who led his country through their brutal Civil War and succeeded in abolishing nearly all slavery within its borders. Abraham Lincoln's surname does trace back to the English town of Lincoln, but his family had migrated to America long before his birth. Many locations in the U.S. now bear the name Lincoln, such as Lincoln, Nebraska. But the shared name with England's Lincoln is only coincidental, as the U.S. place names were named in honor of Abraham Lincoln.\nA permanent military presence came with the 1857 completion of the \"Old Barracks\" (now held by the Museum of Lincolnshire Life). They were replaced by the \"New Barracks\" (now Sobraon Barracks) in 1890, when Lincoln Drill Hall in Broadgate also opened.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nLincoln was hit by typhoid in November 1904 \u2013 August 1905 caused by polluted drinking water from Hartsholme Lake and the River Witham. Over 1,000 people contracted the disease and fatalities totalled 113, including the man responsible for the city's water supply, Liam Kirk of Baker Crescent. Near the beginning of the epidemic, Dr Alexander Cruickshank Houston installed a chlorine disinfection system just ahead of the poorly operating, slow sand filter, to kill the fatal bacteria. Chlorination of the water continued until 1911, when a new supply was implemented. Lincoln's chlorination episode was an early use of chlorine to disinfect a water supply. Westgate Water Tower was built to provide new supplies.\nIn the two world wars, Lincoln switched to war production. The first ever tanks were invented, designed and built in Lincoln by William Foster &amp; Co. in the First World War and population growth provided more workers for greater expansion. The tanks were tested on land now covered by Tritton Road in the south-west suburbs. In the Second World War, Lincoln produced an array of war goods: tanks, aircraft, munitions and military vehicles.\nIn World War II 26 high explosive bombs were dropped on the city, with around 500 incendiary bombs, over five occasions, with eight people killed. 50 houses were destroyed, with the worst night being 9 May 1941. Also much damage occurred in the Dixon Street area on Friday 15 January 1943. Two parachute mines landed in fields on South Common on the night of 19 November 1940, which exploded and broke many windows in the town, but with no more damage. On 8 May 1941, nine high explosive bombs were dropped on around Westwick Gardens in Boultham Park, east of the former Ancaster High School, killing three people.\nA Spitfire and Hurricane, from RAF Digby, collided over Lincoln. One pilot landed on allotments near Kingsway, and another landed near Branston Road. The Spitfire crashed on a house in Drake Street, and the Hurricane did a full circuit of the north of Lincoln, with no pilot aboard, and descended over the top of St Mary le Wigford church, to crash into a row of houses and shops, killing three people, and injuring nine.\nRuston &amp; Hornsby produced diesel engines for ships and locomotives, then by teaming up with former colleagues of Frank Whittle and Power Jets Ltd, in the early 1950s, R &amp; H (which became RGT) opened the first production line for gas turbine engines for land-based and sea-based energy production. Its success made it the city's largest single employer, providing over 5,000 jobs in its factory and research facilities, making it a rich takeover target for industrial conglomerates. It was subsumed by English Electric in November 1966, which was then bought by GEC in 1968, with diesel engine production being transferred to the Ruston Diesels Division in Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire, at the former Vulcan Foundry.\nPelham Works merged with Alstom of France in the late 1980s and was then bought in 2003 by Siemens of Germany as Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery. This includes what is left of Napier Turbochargers. Plans came early in 2008 for a new plant outside the city at Teal Park, North Hykeham. Still, Siemens made large redundancies and moved jobs to Sweden and the Netherlands. The factory now employs 1300. R &amp; H's former Beevor Foundry is now owned by Hoval Group, making industrial boilers (wood chip). The Aerospace Manufacturing Facility (AMF) in Firth Road passed from Alstom Aerospace Ltd to ITP Engines UK in January 2009.\nLincoln's second largest private employer is James Dawson and Son, a belting and hose maker founded in the late 19th century. Its two sites are in Tritton Road. The main one, next to the University of Lincoln, used Lincoln's last coal-fired boiler until it was replaced by gas in July 2018.\nNew suburbs appeared after 1945, but heavy industry declined towards the end of the 20th century. Much development, notably around the Brayford area, has followed the construction of the University of Lincoln's Brayford Campus, which opened in 1996. In 2012, Bishop Grosseteste teaching college, now Lincoln Bishop University was also awarded university status.\nEconomy.\n34 per cent of Lincoln's workforce are in public administration, education and health; distribution, restaurants and hotels account for 25 per cent.\nIndustrial relics like Ruston (now Siemens) remain, with empty industrial warehouse buildings becoming multi-use units, with the likes of the University of Lincoln, local Lincs FM radio station (in the \"Titanic Works\") and gyms using some of the space. The old Corn Exchange, completed in 1848, is now used as a shopping arcade, and the newer Corn Exchange, completed in 1879, is now used as a restaurant and shops.\nLike many other cities, Lincoln has a growing IT economy, with many e-commerce mail order companies. Two electronics firms are e2V and Dynex Semiconductor. Bifrangi, an Italian maker of crankshafts for off-road vehicles using a screw press, is based at the former \"Tower Works\" owned by Smith-Clayton Forge Ltd.\nLincoln is the hub for settlements such as Welton, Saxilby, Skellingthorpe and Washingborough, which look to it for most services and employment needs. Added they raise the population to 165,000. Lincoln is the main centre for jobs and facilities in Central Lincolnshire and performs a regional role over much of Lincolnshire and parts of Nottinghamshire. According to a document entitled \"Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Core Strategy\", Lincoln has a \"travel-to-work\" area with a population of about 300,000. In 2021, Lincoln City Council joined the UK's Key Cities network to help the city's public sector.\nThe University of Lincoln and Lincoln's colleges contribute to the city's growth in the small firms, services, restaurants and entertainment venues. A small business unit next door to a student accommodation facility, the Think Tank, opened in June 2009. Some entertainment venues linked to the university include The Engine Shed and The Venue Cinema. Its presence has also built-up the area around the Brayford Pool.\nTourism.\nThe city is a tourist centre for visitors to historic buildings that include the cathedral, the castle and the medieval Bishop's Palace.\nThe Collection, of which the Usher Gallery is now part, is an important attraction, partly in a purpose-built venue. It currently contains over 2,000,000 objects, and was one of the four finalists for the 2006 Gulbenkian Prize. Any material from official archaeological excavations in Lincolnshire is eventually deposited there. Other attractions include the Museum of Lincolnshire Life and the International Bomber Command Centre.\nFrom 1982 until 2022, the annual Lincoln Christmas Market was held over four days in early December in and around the castle grounds, attracting a quarter of a million visitors at its height.\nDemography.\nEthnicity\nIn the 2021 census, the population of Lincoln district was 103,813. The largest ethnic group was White British at 82.7%, with all \u2018other white\u2019 groups constituting 9.5%, followed by South Asian at 3.2%, Mixed race at 2%, Black British at 1.4%, other ethnic minorities made up 0.9% and Arab were 0.2%. This makes the ethnic makeup of the city 92% White and 8% ethnic minorities.\n15.1% of the people living in Lincoln were born outside of the UK, of which 9.6% are from \u2018other European countries\u2019. The most common countries of birth aside from the UK are Poland at 2.6%, Romania at 1.4%, and Lithuania at 1.1%.\nReligious sites.\nLincoln is home to many active and former churches. These serve the city centre, outer suburbs of the city and urban area. Lincoln Central Mosque and Cultural Centre is on Dixon Street. The city has no Sikh or Hindu temples, with the nearest ones being in Scunthorpe, Grimsby, Nottingham and Doncaster. The Jewish Lincoln Synagogue is on Steep Hill, in the ancient building, Jews' Court, which is believed to be the site of the original medieval synagogue. There is also an international temple on James Street.\nChurches in the city include: St Mary le Wigford, St Giles, St Benedicts, St Swithin's, Lincoln Cathedral, St Hugh's, St Katherine's, Alive Church, Saint Peter at Gowts, Central Methodist Church, St Nicholas Lincoln Unitarian Chapel and Greek Orthodox Church of St Basil the Great and St Paisios and others in the city and outer suburbs. The 1950s built former Ermine United Reform Church building was acquired by the local council and as of 2025 is facing demolition.\nCathedral.\nConstruction of the first Lincoln Cathedral within a \"close\" or walled precinct facing the castle began when the see was removed from the quiet backwater of Dorchester-on-Thames, Oxfordshire. It was completed in 1092 and rebuilt after a fire, but succumbed to the 1185 East Midlands earthquake. The rebuilt minster, enlarged eastwards several times, was on a grand scale, its crossing tower crowned by a spire reputedly Europe's highest at . When complete, the central spire is widely accepted to have succeeded the Great Pyramids of Egypt as the world's tallest man-made structure.\nThe Lincoln bishops were among the magnates of medieval England. The Diocese of Lincoln, the largest in England, had more monasteries than the rest of England put together, and the diocese was supported by large estates. When Magna Carta was drawn up in 1215, one of the witnesses was Hugh of Wells, Bishop of Lincoln. One of only four surviving originals of the document is preserved in Lincoln Castle.\nAmong the famous bishops of Lincoln were Robert Bloet, the magnificent justiciar to Henry I, Hugh of Avalon, the cathedral builder canonised as St Hugh of Lincoln, Robert Grosseteste, the 13th-century intellectual, Henry Beaufort, chancellor of Henry V and Henry VI, Thomas Rotherham, a politician deeply involved in the Wars of the Roses, Philip Repyngdon, chaplain to Henry IV and defender of Wycliffe, and Thomas Wolsey, the lord chancellor of Henry VIII. Theologian William de Montibus headed the cathedral school and was its chancellor until he died in 1213.\nThe administrative centre was the Bishop's Palace, the third element in the central complex. When built in the late 12th century by Hugh of Lincoln, the Bishop's Palace was one of the most important buildings in England. Its East Hall over a vaulted undercroft is the earliest surviving example of a roofed domestic hall. The chapel range and entrance tower were built by Bishop William of Alnwick, who modernised the palace in the 1430s. Both Henry VIII and James I were guests there. The palace was sacked in 1648 by royalist troops during the civil war.\nGeography and environment.\nLincoln lies at an altitude of by the River Witham up to on Castle Hill. It fills a gap in the Lincoln Cliff escarpment, which runs north and south through Central Lincolnshire, with altitudes up to . The city lies on the River Witham, which flows through this gap. The city is southwest of Hull, north-east of Nottingham, north of Peterborough, southeast of Leeds and east south-east of Sheffield.\nUphill and Downhill.\nDue to the variation in altitude, which presents something of an obstacle, Lincoln is divided informally into two zones: uphill and downhill.\nThe uphill area comprises the northern part of the city, on top of the Lincoln Cliff (to the north of the gap). This includes the historical quarter, including Lincoln Cathedral, Lincoln Castle and the Medieval Bishop's Palace, known locally as The Bail (though described in tourist literature as the Cathedral Quarter). It also has residential suburbs to the north and north-east. The downhill area comprises the city centre and suburbs to the south and south-west. Steep Hill is a narrow, pedestrian street directly connecting the two. It passes through an archway known as the Stonebow.\nThis divide, peculiar to Lincoln, was once an important class distinction, with uphill more affluent and downhill less so. The distinction dates from the time of the Norman Conquest, when the religious and military elite occupied the hilltop. The expansion of suburbs in both parts of the city since the mid-19th century has diluted the distinction.\nEcology.\nThe mute swan is an iconic species for Lincoln. Many pairs nest each year beside the Brayford, and they feature on the university's heraldic emblem. Other bird life within the city includes peregrine falcon, tawny owl and common kingfisher.\nMammals on the city edges include red fox, roe deer and least weasel. European perch, northern pike and bream are among fishes seen in the Witham and Brayford. Nature reserves around the city include Greetwell Hollow SSSI, Swanholme SSSI, Whisby Nature Park, Boultham Mere and Hartsholme Country Park.\nSince 2016, little egrets have nested in the Birchwood area and otters appeared in the River Witham. Both are native to Britain and repopulating the area after near extermination.\nSeveral invasive species of plants and animals have reached Lincoln. Japanese knotweed and Himalayan balsam are Asian plant species around the River Witham. Galinsoga and Amsinckia are American species found among city weeds, also American mink which are occasionally seen on the Witham.\nBuilt-up area.\nThe Lincoln built-up area extends outside of the city boundaries and includes the town of North Hykeham and the villages of Bracebridge Heath, Canwick, South Hykeham and Waddington. It had a population of 115,000 according to the 2011 census.\nDistricts and suburban areas.\nDespite its relatively limited district boundaries, Lincoln has had many older suburbs which date as far back as its Roman origins. Notable historic districts, that still survive in name or other uses include:\nOther areas of the city include historical hamlets and villages such as Boultham Moor, Bracebridge and Swallowbeck. As well as small parts of the nearby town of North Hykeham and parts of villages of Canwick and Waddington. As well as the former RAF Skellingthorpe site now occupied by Birchwood. Lincoln is also undergoing major expansion with a brand new Western Growth Corridor between Skellingthorpe, Birchwood and Hartsholme.\nClimate.\nLincoln has a typical East Midlands maritime climate of cool summers and mild winters. The nearest Met Office weather station is at RAF Waddington, to the south. Temperature extremes since 1948 have ranged between on 19 July 2022, and in February 1956. A former weather station held the record for the lowest daytime maximum temperature recorded in England in the month of December: on 17 December 1981, however this was found to be incorrect by the Met Office. The lowest recent temperature was in December 2010, although another weather station at Scampton, a similar distance north of the city centre, fell to , so equalling Waddington's record low set in 1956.\nTransport.\nRail.\nLincoln railway station is at the meeting point of four railway lines, which run to Newark, Gainsborough, Grimsby and Sleaford. It is served by direct trains to London King's Cross, Leicester, Nottingham, Sheffield, Doncaster, Grimsby Town and Peterborough. Hykeham railway station is located in the southwestern suburbs and is served by local trains on the line to Newark.\nThe city was previously served by three other railway lines: the Lincolnshire loop line, the Lancashire, Derbyshire and East Coast Railway and the Grantham and Lincoln railway line Trains on the Newark line formerly stopped at Lincoln St Marks, a separate station to the south, until they were diverted to the current station in 1985. Its site is now part of a shopping park.\nRoad.\nThe city lies on the A57, A46, A15 and A158 roads. These bring high levels of through traffic and bypasses have been built. To the north west is the \u00a319-million A46 bypass opened in December 1985. On 19 December 2020 the \u00a3122-million A15 Eastern bypass was completed. A southern bypass, the North Hykeham relief road, is due to start construction in 2025 and will be the final section of a complete ring road around the city.\nUntil the 1980s, two trunk roads passed through Lincoln: the A46 and A15, both feeding traffic along the High Street. At the intersection of Guildhall Street and the High Street, the roads met at the termination of the A57. North of the city centre, the former A15 (Riseholme Road) is now the B1226, and the old A46 (Nettleham Road) is now the B1182. The early northern inner ring-road, formed of Yarborough Road and Yarborough Crescent, is numbered B1273.\nAir.\nEast Midlands Airport, 43 miles from Lincoln, is the main international airport serving the county. It mainly handles European flights with low-cost airlines. Humberside Airport, 29 miles north of Lincoln, is the only airport located in the county. It has a small number of flights mainly to hub airports such as Amsterdam Schiphol Airport. From 2005 until 2022, Doncaster Sheffield Airport also served Lincoln.\nEducation.\nHigher education.\nThe older of Lincoln's two higher education institutions, Lincoln Bishop University, was started as a teacher training college linked to the Anglican Church in 1862. During the 1990s it branched out into other subject areas with a focus on the arts and drama. It became a university college in 2006 with degree powers taken over from the University of Leicester. It gained university status in 2012. An annual graduation celebration takes place in Lincoln Cathedral.\nThe larger University of Lincoln started as the University of Lincolnshire and Humberside in 1996, when the University of Humberside opened a Lincoln campus next to Brayford Pool. Lincoln School of Art and Design (which was Lincolnshire's main outlet for higher education) and Riseholme Agricultural College, previously part of De Montfort University in Leicester, were absorbed into the University of Lincoln in 2001, and subsequently the Lincoln campus took priority over the Hull campus.\nThe name changed to the University of Lincoln in September 2002. In the 2021\u20132022 academic year, a total of 18,705 university students studied in the city.\nFurther education.\nFurther education in Lincoln is provided by Lincoln College, Lincolnshire's largest education institution with 18,500 students, 2,300 of them full-time. There is a specialist creative college, Access Creative, offering courses in music, media and games design to some 180 students, all full-time.\nSchools.\nThe school system in Lincoln is anomalous within Lincolnshire despite being part of the same local education authority (LEA), as most of the county retained the grammar-school system.\nIn 1952, William Farr School was founded in Welton, a nearby village. Lincoln itself had four single-sex grammar schools until September 1974.\nThe Priory Academy LSST converted to academy status in 2008, in turn establishing The Priory Federation of Academies. The Priory Witham Academy was formed when the federation absorbed Moorlands Infant School, Usher Junior School and Ancaster High School. The Priory City of Lincoln Academy was formed when the City of Lincoln Community College merged into the federation. Both schools were rebuilt after substantial investment by the federation. Cherry Willingham School joined the federation in 2017, becoming The Priory Pembroke Academy.\nThe Lincolnshire LEA was ranked 32nd in the country based on its proportion of pupils attaining at least 5 A\u2013C grades at GCSE including maths and English (62.2% compared with a national average of 58.2%).\nThere are four special-needs schools in Lincoln: Fortuna Primary School (5\u201311 year olds), Sincil Sports College (11\u201316), St Christopher's School (3\u201316) and St Francis Community Special School (2\u201318).\nMedia.\nThe local newspaper, the \"Lincolnshire Echo\", was founded in 1894. Local radio stations are BBC Radio Lincolnshire on 94.9 FM, its commercial rival Greatest Hits Radio Lincolnshire on 102.2FM, Hits Radio Lincolnshire on DAB and Lincoln City Radio on 103.6 FM a community radio station catering mainly for listeners over 50. \"The Lincolnite\" was an online mobile publication covering the greater-Lincoln area since 2010 but ceased trading in August 2024. There used to be another station named Siren FM, operated by the University of Lincoln, but it ceased broadcasting at the end of June 2024 and the licences have been handed back to Ofcom.\nThe student publication \"The Linc\" is available online and in print and targets the University of Lincoln's student population.\nLocal TV coverage is provided by BBC Yorkshire and Lincolnshire and ITV Yorkshire which is received from the Belmont TV transmitter. The Waltham TV transmitter can also be received in the city that broadcast BBC East Midlands and ITV Central.\nSport.\nLincoln's professional football team is Lincoln City FC, nicknamed \"The Imps\", which plays at the Sincil Bank stadium on the southern edge of the city. The collapse of ITV Digital, which owed Lincoln City FC more than \u00a3100,000, in 2002 saw the team faced with bankruptcy, but it was saved by a fund-raising venture among fans, which returned ownership of the club to them, where it has remained since. The club was the first to be relegated from the English Football League, when automatic relegation to the Football Conference was introduced from the 1986\u201387 season. Lincoln City regained its league place at the first attempt and held onto it until the 2010\u201311 season, when it was again relegated to the Football Conference.\nLincoln City was the first club managed by Graham Taylor, who went on to manage the England national football team from 1990 to 1993. He was at Lincoln City from 1972 to 1977, during which time the club won promotion from the Fourth Division as champions in 1976. The club also won the Football League Division Three North title on three separate occasions, a joint record. Its most successful era was in the early 1980s, winning promotion from the Fourth Division in 1981 and narrowly missing promotion to the Second Division in the two years that followed. It reached the quarter-finals of the FA Cup in 2017, beating several teams in the top two tiers of English football before being defeated by Arsenal. More recently Lincoln City won Football League Two in the 2018\u20132019 season and the EFL Trophy in 2018. It is currently managed by Michael Skubala.\nLincoln is also home to Lincoln United FC, Lincoln Moorlands Railway FC and Lincoln Griffins Ladies FC.\nLincoln hosts other sports facilities such American football's Lincolnshire Bombers, which plays in the BAFA National Leagues, the Lincolnshire Bombers Roller Girls, the Imposters Rollergirls, and hosts Lincoln Rowing centre on the River Witham. Lindum Hockey Club plays in the north of the city. Since 1956 the city has played host to the Lincoln Grand Prix one-day cycle race, which for some 30 years has used a city-centre finishing circuit incorporating the challenging 1-in-6 cobbled ascent of Michaelgate. Since 2013 the city has had a professional wrestling promotion and training academy, Lincoln Fight Factory Wrestling. The Lincoln Lions rugby union team has been playing since 1902.\nTwo short-lived greyhound racing tracks were opened by Lincolnshire Greyhound Racing Association. One was the Highfield track in Hykeham Road, which opened on 13 September 1931, and the second the Lincoln Speedway on the Rope Walk, which opened on 4 June 1932. Racing at both was independent, as they were \"flapping\" tracks unaffiliated to the sport's governing body, the National Greyhound Racing Club.\nNotable people.\nIn alphabetical order:\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns.\nLincoln is twinned with:\nFreedom of the city.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Lincoln.\nSee also.\nAttractions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlaces.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPeople.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSocieties and groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17881", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17881", "title": "La lojban.", "text": ""}
{"id": "17884", "revid": "6690847", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17884", "title": "List of Latin language poets", "text": ""}
{"id": "17885", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17885", "title": "Luftwaffe", "text": "Branch of the German military during World War II\nMilitary unit\nThe Luftwaffe () was the aerial-warfare branch of the before and during World War II. Germany's military air arms during World War I, the of the Imperial Army and the of the Imperial Navy, had been disbanded in May 1920 in accordance with the terms of the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, which banned Germany from having any air force.\nDuring the interwar period, German pilots were trained secretly in violation of the treaty at Lipetsk Air Base in the Soviet Union. With the rise of the Nazi Party and the repudiation of the Versailles Treaty, the Luftwaffe's existence was publicly acknowledged and officially established on 26 February 1935, just over two weeks before open defiance of the Versailles Treaty through German rearmament and conscription would be announced on 16 March. The Condor Legion, a Luftwaffe detachment sent to aid Nationalist forces in the Spanish Civil War, provided the force with a valuable testing ground for new tactics and aircraft. Partially as a result of this combat experience, the Luftwaffe had become one of the most sophisticated, technologically advanced, and battle-experienced air forces in the world when World War II began on 1 September 1939. By the summer of 1939, the Luftwaffe had twenty-eight \"Geschwader\" (wings). The Luftwaffe also operated a paratrooper force known as the .\nThe Luftwaffe proved instrumental in the German victories across Poland 1939 and Western Europe in spring 1940. Although the Luftwaffe inflicted severe damage to the RAF's infrastructure during the Battle of Britain and devastated many British cities during the subsequent Blitz, it failed to force the British into submission. In 1941 (Invasion of Yugoslavia, German invasion of Greece and since June 1941 against the Soviet Union, the Luftwaffe was very successful. \nFrom 1942, Allied bombing campaigns gradually destroyed the Luftwaffe's fighter arm. From late 1942, the Luftwaffe used its surplus ground support and other personnel to raise Luftwaffe Field Divisions. In addition to its service on the Western front, the Luftwaffe operated over the Soviet Union, North Africa, and Southern Europe. Despite its belated use of advanced turbojet and rocket-propelled aircraft for the destruction of Allied bombers, the Luftwaffe was overwhelmed by the Allies' superior numbers and improved tactics, and a lack of trained pilots and aviation fuel. In January 1945, during the closing stages of the Battle of the Bulge, the Luftwaffe made a last-ditch effort to win air superiority, and met with failure. With rapidly dwindling supplies of petroleum, oil, and lubricants after this campaign, and as part of the entire combined military forces as a whole, the Luftwaffe ceased to be an effective fighting force.\nAfter the defeat of Nazi Germany, the Luftwaffe was disbanded in 1946. During World War II, German pilots claimed roughly 70,000 aerial victories, while over 75,000 Luftwaffe aircraft were destroyed or significantly damaged. Of these, nearly 40,000 were lost entirely. The Luftwaffe had only two commanders-in-chief throughout its history: Hermann G\u00f6ring and later Robert Ritter von Greim for the last two weeks of the war.\nThe Luftwaffe was deeply involved in Nazi war crimes. By the end of the war, a significant percentage of aircraft production originated in concentration camps, an industry employing tens of thousands of forced laborers. The Luftwaffe's demand for labor was one of the factors that led to the deportation and murder of hundreds of thousands of Hungarian Jews in 1944. The Luftwaffe frequently bombed non-military targets, the organised Nazi human experimentation, and Luftwaffe ground troops committed massacres in Italy, Greece, and Poland.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Imperial German Army Air Service was founded in 1910 with the name , most often shortened to . It was renamed the on 8 October 1916. The air war on the Western Front received the most attention in the annals of the earliest accounts of military aviation, since it produced aces such as Manfred von Richthofen, Ernst Udet, Oswald Boelcke, and Max Immelmann. After the defeat of Germany, the service was dissolved on 8 May 1920 under the conditions of the Treaty of Versailles, which also mandated the destruction of all German military aircraft.\nSince the Treaty of Versailles forbade Germany to have an air force, German pilots trained in secret. Initially, civil aviation schools within Germany were used, yet only light trainers could be used in order to maintain the fa\u00e7ade that the trainees were going to fly with civil airlines such as . To train its pilots on the latest combat aircraft, Germany solicited the help of the Soviet Union, which was also isolated in Europe. A secret training airfield was established at Lipetsk in 1924 and operated for approximately nine years using mostly Dutch and Soviet, but also some German, training aircraft before being closed in 1933. This base was officially known as the 4th squadron of the 40th wing of the Red Army. Hundreds of Luftwaffe pilots and technical personnel visited, studied, and were trained at Soviet Air Force schools in several locations in Central Russia. Roessing, Blume, Fosse, Teetsemann, Heini, Makratzki, Blumendaat, and many other future Luftwaffe aces were trained in the USSR in joint Soviet-German schools that were set up under the patronage of Ernst August K\u00f6string.\nThe first steps towards the Luftwaffe's formation were undertaken just months after Adolf Hitler came to power. Hermann G\u00f6ring, a World War I ace, became National for aviation with former \"Luft Hansa\" director Erhard Milch as his deputy. In April 1933, the Reich Aviation Ministry ( or RLM) was established. The RLM was in charge of the development and production of aircraft. G\u00f6ring's control over all aspects of aviation became absolute. On 25 March 1933, the German Air Sports Association absorbed all private and national organisations, while retaining its 'sports' title. On 15 May 1933, all military aviation organisations in the RLM were merged, forming the Luftwaffe; its official 'birthday'. The National Socialist Flyers Corps ( or NSFK) was formed in 1937 to give pre-military flying training to male youths, and to engage adult sport aviators in the Nazi movement. Military-age members of the NSFK were drafted into the Luftwaffe. As all such prior NSFK members were also Nazi Party members, this gave the new Luftwaffe a strong Nazi ideological base in contrast to the other branches of the (the \"Heer\" (army) and the (navy)). G\u00f6ring played a leading role in the buildup of the Luftwaffe in 1933\u201336, but had little further involvement in the development of the force after 1936, and Milch became the \"de facto\" minister until 1937.\nThe absence of G\u00f6ring in planning and production matters was fortunate. G\u00f6ring had little knowledge of current aviation, had last flown in 1922, and had not kept himself informed of the latest events. G\u00f6ring also displayed a lack of understanding of doctrine and technical issues in aerial warfare which he left to others more competent. The Commander-in-Chief left the organisation and building of the Luftwaffe, after 1936, to Erhard Milch. However, G\u00f6ring, as a part of Hitler's inner circle, provided access to financial resources and materiel for rearming and equipping the Luftwaffe.\nAnother prominent figure in German air power construction this time was Helmuth Wilberg. Wilberg later played a large role in the development of German air doctrine. Having headed the air staff for eight years in the 1920s, Wilberg had considerable experience and was ideal for a senior staff position. G\u00f6ring considered making Wilberg Chief of Staff (CS). However, it was revealed Wilberg had a Jewish mother. For that reason, G\u00f6ring could not have him as CS. Not wishing his talent to go to waste, G\u00f6ring ensured the racial policy of Nazi Germany did not apply to him. Wilberg remained in the air staff, and under Walther Wever helped draw up the Luftwaffe's principle doctrinal texts, \"The Conduct of the Aerial War\" and \"Regulation 16\".\nPreparing for war: 1933\u20131939.\nWever years, 1933\u20131936.\nThe German officer corps was keen to develop strategic bombing capabilities against its enemies. However, economic and geopolitical considerations had to take priority. The German air power theorists continued to develop strategic theories, but emphasis was given to army support, as Germany was a continental power and expected to face ground operations following any declaration of hostilities.\nFor these reasons, between 1933 and 1934, the Luftwaffe's leadership was primarily concerned with tactical and operational methods. In aerial terms, the army concept of was an operational concept, as well as a tactical doctrine. In World War I, the initial, 1914\u201315 era observation/reconnaissance air units, each with six two-seater aircraft apiece, had been attached to specific army formations and acted as support. Dive bomber units were considered essential to , attacking enemy headquarters and lines of communications. Luftwaffe \"Regulation 10: The Bomber\" (), published in 1934, advocated air superiority and approaches to ground attack tactics without dealing with operational matters. Until 1935, the 1926 manual \"Directives for the Conduct of the Operational Air War\" continued to act as the main guide for German air operations. The manual directed OKL to focus on limited operations (not strategic operations): the protection of specific areas and support of the army in combat.\nWith an effective tactical-operational concept, the German air power theorists needed a strategic doctrine and organisation. Robert Knauss, a serviceman (not a pilot) in the during World War I, and later an experienced pilot with \"Lufthansa\", was a prominent theorist of air power. Knauss promoted the Giulio Douhet theory that air power could win wars alone by destroying enemy industry and breaking enemy morale by \"terrorising the population\" of major cities. This advocated attacks on civilians. The General Staff blocked the entry of Douhet's theory into doctrine, fearing revenge strikes against German civilians and cities.\nIn December 1934, Chief of the Luftwaffe General Staff Walther Wever sought to mold the Luftwaffe's battle doctrine into a strategic plan. At this time, Wever conducted war games (simulated against France) in a bid to establish his theory of a strategic bombing force that would, he thought, prove decisive by winning the war through the destruction of enemy industry, even though these exercises also included tactical strikes against enemy ground forces and communications. In 1935, \"Luftwaffe Regulation 16: The Conduct of the Air War\" was drawn up. In the proposal, it concluded, \"The mission of the Luftwaffe is to serve these goals.\"\nHistorian James Corum states that under this doctrine, the Luftwaffe leadership rejected the practice of \"terror bombing\" (see Luftwaffe strategic bombing doctrine). According to Corum, terror bombing was deemed to be \"counter-productive\", increasing rather than destroying the enemy's will to resist. Such bombing campaigns were regarded as diversion from the Luftwaffe's main operations; destruction of the enemy armed forces.\nNevertheless, Wever recognised the importance of strategic bombing. In newly introduced doctrine, \"The Conduct of the Aerial Air War\" in 1935, Wever rejected the theory of Douhet and outlined five key points to air strategy:\nWever began planning for a strategic bomber force and sought to incorporate strategic bombing into a war strategy. He believed that tactical aircraft should only be used as a step to developing a strategic air force. In May 1934, Wever initiated a seven-year project to develop the so-called \"Ural bomber\", which could strike as far as into the heart of the Soviet Union. In 1935, this design competition led to the Dornier Do 19 and Junkers Ju 89 prototypes, although both were underpowered. In April 1936, Wever issued requirements for the 'Bomber A' design competition: a range of with a bomb load. However, Wever's vision of a \"Ural\" bomber was never realised, and his emphasis on strategic aerial operations was lost. The only design submittal for Wever's 'Bomber A' that reached production was Heinkel's \"Projekt 1041\", which culminated in the production and frontline service as Germany's only operational heavy bomber, the Heinkel He 177, on 5 November 1937, the date on which it received its RLM airframe number.\nIn 1935, the military functions of the RLM were grouped into the (OKL; \"Air Force High Command\").\nFollowing the untimely death of Wever in early June 1936 in an aviation-related accident, by the late 1930s the Luftwaffe had no clear purpose. The air force was not subordinated to the army support role, and it was not given any particular strategic mission. German doctrine fell between the two concepts. The Luftwaffe was to be an organisation capable of carrying out broad and general support tasks rather than any specific mission. Mainly, this path was chosen to encourage more flexible use of air power and offer the ground forces the right conditions for a decisive victory. In fact, on the outbreak of war, only 15% of the Luftwaffe's aircraft were devoted to ground support operations, counter to the long-held myth that the Luftwaffe was designed for only tactical and operational missions.\nChange of direction, 1936\u201337.\nWever's participation in the construction of the Luftwaffe came to an abrupt end on 3 June 1936 when he was killed along with his engineer in a Heinkel He 70 Blitz, ironically on the very day that his \"Bomber A\" heavy bomber design competition was announced. After Wever's death, G\u00f6ring began taking more of an interest in the appointment of Luftwaffe staff officers. G\u00f6ring appointed his successor Albert Kesselring as Chief of Staff and Ernst Udet to head the Reich's Air Ministry Technical Office (), although he was not a technical expert. Despite this Udet helped change the Luftwaffe's tactical direction towards fast medium bombers to destroy enemy air power in the battle zone rather than through industrial bombing of its aviation production.\nKesselring and Udet did not get on. During Kesselring's time as CS, 1936\u20131937, a power struggle developed between the two as Udet attempted to extend his own power within the Luftwaffe. Kesselring also had to contend with G\u00f6ring appointing \"yes men\" to positions of importance. Udet realised his limitations, and his failures in the production and development of German aircraft would have serious long term consequences.\nThe failure of the Luftwaffe to progress further towards attaining a strategic bombing force was attributable to several reasons. Many in the Luftwaffe command believed medium bombers to be sufficient power to launch strategic bombing operations against Germany's most likely enemies; France, Czechoslovakia, and Poland. The United Kingdom presented greater problems. Hellmuth Felmy, commander of in 1939, was charged with devising a plan for an air war over the British Isles. Felmy was convinced that Britain could be defeated through morale bombing. Felmy noted the alleged panic that had broken out in London during the Munich crisis, evidence he believed of British weakness. A second reason was technical. German designers had never solved the issues of the Heinkel He 177A's design difficulties, brought on by the requirement from its inception on 5 November 1937 to have moderate dive-bombing capabilities in a 30-meter wingspan aircraft. Moreover, Germany did not possess the economic resources to match the later British and American effort of 1943\u20131944, particularly in large-scale mass production of high power output aircraft engines (with output of over least ). In addition, the OKL had not foreseen the industrial and military effort strategic bombing would require. By 1939 the Luftwaffe was not much better prepared than its enemies to conduct a strategic bombing campaign, with fatal results during the Battle of Britain.\nThe German rearmament programme faced difficulties acquiring raw materials. Germany imported most of its essential materials for rebuilding the Luftwaffe, in particular rubber and aluminum. Petroleum imports were particularly vulnerable to blockade. Germany pushed for synthetic fuel plants but still failed to meet demands. In 1937 Germany imported more fuel than it had at the start of the decade. By summer 1938, only 25% of the requirements could be covered. In steel materials, industry was operating at barely 83% of capacity, and by November 1938 G\u00f6ring reported the economic situation was serious. The (OKW), the overall command for all German military forces, ordered reductions in raw materials and steel used for armament production. The figures for reduction were substantial: 30% steel, 20% copper, 47% aluminum, and 14% rubber. Under such circumstances, it was not possible for Milch, Udet, or Kesselring to produce a formidable strategic bombing force even had they wanted to do so.\nThe development of aircraft was now confined to the production of twin-engined medium bombers that required much less material, manpower, and aviation production capacity than Wever's \"Ural Bomber\". German industry could build two medium bombers for one heavy bomber and the RLM would not gamble on developing a heavy bomber which would also take time. G\u00f6ring remarked, \"the \"F\u00fchrer\" will not ask how big the bombers there are, but only how many there are.\" The premature death of Wever, one of the Luftwaffe's finest officers, left the Luftwaffe without a strategic air force during World War II, which eventually proved fatal to the German war effort.\nThe lack of strategic capability should have been apparent much earlier. The Sudeten Crisis highlighted German unpreparedness to conduct a strategic air war (although the British and French were in a much weaker position), and Hitler ordered the Luftwaffe be expanded to five times its earlier size. The OKL badly neglected the need for transport aircraft; even in 1943, transport units were described as (Bomber Units on Special Duties, KGzbV). and only grouping them together into dedicated cargo and personnel transport wings () during that year. In March 1938, as the \"Anschluss\" was taking place, G\u00f6ring ordered Felmy to investigate the prospect of air raids against Britain. Felmy concluded it was not possible until bases in Belgium and the Netherlands were obtained and the Luftwaffe had heavy bombers. It mattered little, as war was avoided by the Munich Agreement, and the need for long-range aircraft did not arise.\nThese failures were not exposed until wartime. In the meantime, German designs of mid-1930s origin such as the Messerschmitt Bf 109, the Heinkel He 111, the Junkers Ju 87 Stuka, and the Dornier Do 17, performed very well. All first saw active service in the Condor Legion against Soviet-supplied aircraft. The Luftwaffe also quickly realised the days of the biplane fighter were finished, the Heinkel He 51 being switched to service as a trainer. Particularly impressive were the Heinkel and Dornier, which fulfilled the Luftwaffe's requirements for bombers that were faster than 1930s-era fighters, many of which were biplanes or strut-braced monoplanes.\nDespite the participation of these aircraft (mainly from 1938 onward), it was the venerable Junkers Ju 52 (which soon became the backbone of the ) that made the main contribution. During the Spanish Civil War Hitler remarked, \"Franco ought to erect a monument to the glory of the Junkers Ju 52. It is the aircraft which the Spanish revolution has to thank for its victory.\"\nDive-bombing.\nPoor accuracy from level bombers in 1937 led the Luftwaffe to grasp the benefits of dive-bombing. The latter could achieve far better accuracy against tactical ground targets than heavier conventional bombers. Range was not a key criterion for this mission. It was not always feasible for the army to move heavy artillery over recently captured territory to bombard fortifications or support ground forces, and dive bombers could do the job faster. Dive bombers, often single-engine two-man machines, could achieve better results than larger six or seven-man aircraft, at a tenth of the cost and four times the accuracy. This led to Udet championing the dive bomber, particularly the Junkers Ju 87.\nUdet's \"love affair\" with dive-bombing seriously affected the long-term development of the Luftwaffe, especially after Wever's death. The tactical strike aircraft programmes were meant to serve as interim solutions until the next generation of aircraft arrived. In 1936 the Junkers Ju 52 was the backbone of the German bomber fleet. This led to a rush on the part of the RLM to produce the Junkers Ju 86, the Heinkel He 111, and the Dornier Do 17 before a proper evaluation was made. The Ju 86 was poor while the He 111 showed the most promise. The Spanish Civil War convinced Udet (along with limited output from the German munitions industry) that wastage was not acceptable in munition terms. Udet sought to build dive-bombing into the Junkers Ju 88 and conveyed the same idea, initiated specifically by the OKL for the Heinkel He 177, approved in early November 1937. In the case of the Ju 88, 50,000 modifications had to be made. The weight was increased from seven to twelve tons. This resulted in a speed loss of 200\u00a0km/h. Udet merely conveyed the OKL's own dive-bombing capability request to Ernst Heinkel concerning the He 177, who vehemently opposed such an idea, which ruined its development as a heavy bomber. G\u00f6ring was not able to rescind the dive-bombing requirement for the He 177A until September 1942.\nMobilisation, 1938\u20131941.\nBy the summer of 1939, the Luftwaffe had ready for combat nine (fighter wings) mostly equipped with the Messerschmitt Bf 109E, four \"Zerst\u00f6rergeschwader\" (destroyer wings) equipped with the Messerschmitt Bf 110 heavy fighters, 11 (bomber wings) equipped mainly with the Heinkel He 111 and the Dornier Do 17Z, and four (dive bomber wings) primarily armed with the iconic Junkers Ju 87B \"Stuka\". The Luftwaffe was just starting to accept the Junkers Ju 88A for service, as it had encountered design difficulties, with only a dozen aircraft of the type considered combat-ready. The Luftwaffe's strength at this time stood at 373,000 personnel (208,000 flying troops, 107,000 in the Flak Corps, and 58,000 in the Signals Corps). Aircraft strength was 4,201 operational aircraft: 1,191 bombers, 361 dive bombers, 788 fighters, 431 heavy fighters, and 488 transports. Despite deficiencies, it was an impressive force.\nHowever, even by the spring of 1940, the Luftwaffe still had not mobilised fully. Despite the shortage of raw materials, Udet had increased production through introducing a 10-hour working day for aviation industries and rationalising production. During this period 30 and 16 were raised and equipped. A further five (\"Destroyer groups\") were created (JGr 101, 102, 126, 152 and 176), all equipped with the Bf 110.\nThe Luftwaffe also greatly expanded its aircrew training programmes by 42%, to 63 flying schools. These facilities were moved to eastern Germany, away from possible Allied threats. The number of aircrew reached 4,727, an increase of 31%. However, the rush to complete this rapid expansion scheme resulted in the deaths of 997 personnel and another 700 wounded. 946 aircraft were also destroyed in these accidents. The number of aircrew completing their training was up to 3,941, The Luftwaffe's entire strength was now 2.2 million personnel.\nIn April and May 1941, Udet headed the Luftwaffe delegation inspecting the Soviet aviation industry in compliance with the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact. Udet informed G\u00f6ring \"that Soviet air forces are very strong and technically advanced.\" G\u00f6ring decided not to report the facts to Hitler, hoping that a surprise attack would quickly destroy the USSR. Udet realised that the upcoming war with the USSR might cripple Germany. Udet, torn between truth and loyalty, suffered a psychological breakdown and even tried to tell Hitler the truth, but G\u00f6ring told Hitler that Udet was lying, then took Udet under control by giving him drugs at drinking parties and hunting trips. Udet's drinking and psychological condition became a problem, but G\u00f6ring used Udet's dependency to manipulate him.\nLuftwaffe organisation.\nLuftwaffe commanders.\nThroughout the history of Nazi Germany, the Luftwaffe had only two commanders-in-chief. The first was G\u00f6ring, with the second and last being Robert Ritter von Greim. His appointment as commander-in-chief of the Luftwaffe was concomitant with his promotion to , the last German officer in World War II to be promoted to the highest rank. Other officers promoted to the second highest military rank in Germany were Kesselring, Hugo Sperrle, Milch, and Wolfram von Richthofen.\nAt the end of the war, with Berlin surrounded by the Red Army, G\u00f6ring suggested to Hitler that he take over leadership of the Reich. Hitler ordered his arrest and execution, but G\u00f6ring's SS guards did not carry out the order, and G\u00f6ring survived to be tried at Nuremberg.\nSperrle was prosecuted at the OKW trial, one of the last twelve of the Nuremberg trials after the war. He was acquitted on all four counts. He died in Munich in 1953.\nOrganisation and chain of command.\nAt the start of the war the Luftwaffe had four (air fleets), each responsible for roughly a quarter of Germany. As the war progressed more air fleets were created as the areas under German rule expanded. As one example, was created in 1940 to direct operations in Norway and Denmark, and other were created as necessary. Each would contain several (Air Corps), (Air Division), (Fighter Corps), (Air Division), or (Fighter Air Command). Each formations would have attached to it a number of units, usually several , but also independent and . were also responsible for the training aircraft and schools in their operational areas.\nA was commanded by a , with the rank of either major, (lieutenant colonel) or (colonel). Other \"staff\" officers within the unit with administrative duties included the adjutant, technical officer, and operations officer, who were usually (though not always) experienced aircrew or pilots still flying on operations. Other specialist staff were navigation, signals, and intelligence personnel. A (headquarters flight) was attached to each .\nA (hunting wing) (JG) was a single-seat day fighter , typically equipped with Bf 109 or Fw 190 aircraft flying in the fighter or fighter-bomber roles. Late in the war, by 1944\u201345, JG 7 and JG 400 (and the jet specialist JV 44) flew much more advanced aircraft, with JG 1 working up with the Heinkel He 162 \"emergency fighter\" at war's end. A consisted of groups (), which in turn consisted of (fighter squadrons). Hence, Fighter Wing 1 was JG 1, its first (group) was I./JG 1, using a Roman numeral for the number only, and its first (squadron) was 1./JG 1. strength was usually 120\u2013125 aircraft.\nEach was commanded by a , and a by a . However, these were \"appointments\", not ranks, within the Luftwaffe. Usually, the would hold the rank of or, exceptionally, an . Even a (second lieutenant) could find himself commanding a .\nSimilarly, a bomber wing was a (KG), a night fighter wing was a (NJG), a dive bomber wing was a (StG), and units equivalent to those in RAF Coastal Command, with specific responsibilities for coastal patrols and search and rescue duties, were (K\u00fc.Fl. Gr.). Specialist bomber groups were known as (KGr). The strength of a bomber was about 80\u201390 aircraft.\nPersonnel.\nThe peacetime strength of the Luftwaffe in the spring of 1939 was 370,000 men. After mobilisation in 1939 almost 900,000 men served, and just before Operation Barbarossa in 1941 personnel strength had reached 1.5 million men. The Luftwaffe reached its largest personnel strength during the period November 1943 to June 1944, with almost three million men and women in uniform; 1.7 million of these were male soldiers, 1 million male and civilian employees, and almost 300,000 female and male auxiliaries (). In October 1944, the anti-aircraft units had 600,000 soldiers and 530,000 auxiliaries, including 60,000 male members of the , 50,000 (males age 15\u201317), 80,000 (males above military age) and (males unfit for military service), and 160,000 female and , as well as 160,000 foreign personnel (Hiwis).\nSpanish Civil War.\nThe Luftwaffe's Condor Legion experimented with new doctrine and aircraft during the Spanish Civil War. It helped the \"Falange\" under Francisco Franco to defeat the Republican forces. Over 20,000 German airmen gained combat experience that would give the Luftwaffe an important advantage going into the Second World War. One infamous operation was the bombing of Guernica in the Basque country. It is commonly assumed this attack was the result of a \"terror doctrine\" in Luftwaffe doctrine. The raids on Guernica and Madrid caused many civilian casualties and a wave of protests from abroad. It has been suggested that the bombing of Guernica was carried out for military tactical reasons, in support of ground operations, but the town was not directly involved in any fighting at that point in time. It was not until 1942 that the Germans started to develop a bombing policy in which civilians were the primary targets, although the Blitz on London and many other British cities involved indiscriminate bombing of civilian areas, 'nuisance raids' which could even involve the machine-gunning of civilians and livestock.\nWorld War II.\nWhen World War II began in 1939, the Luftwaffe was one of the most technologically advanced air forces in the world. During the Polish Campaign that triggered the war, it quickly established air superiority, and then air supremacy. It supported the German Army operations which ended the campaign in five weeks. The Luftwaffe's performance was as the OKL had hoped. The Luftwaffe rendered invaluable support to the army, mopping up pockets of resistance. G\u00f6ring was delighted with the performance. Command and control problems occurred, but flexibility and improvisation in both the army and the Luftwaffe solved these problems. The Luftwaffe was to have in place a ground-to-air communication system, which played a vital role in the success of 1940's .\nIn the spring of 1940 the Luftwaffe assisted the and in the invasion of Norway. Flying in reinforcements and winning air superiority, the Luftwaffe contributed decisively to the German conquest.\nIn May and June 1940, the Luftwaffe contributed to the unexpected German success in the Battle of France. It destroyed three Allied Air Forces and helped secure the defeat of France in just over six weeks. However, it could not destroy the British Expeditionary Force at Dunkirk despite intense bombing. The BEF escaped to continue the war.\nDuring the Battle of Britain in summer 1940, the Luftwaffe inflicted severe damage on Britain's Royal Air Force, but did not achieve the air superiority that Hitler had demanded for the proposed invasion of Britain, which was postponed and then canceled in December 1940. The Luftwaffe ravaged British cities during the Blitz of 1940\u20131941, but failed to break British morale, and the RAF shot down German planes by over a two to one ratio. Hitler had already ordered preparations for Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union.\nIn spring 1941 the Luftwaffe helped its Axis partner, Italy, secure victory in the Balkans Campaign and continued to support Italy or the Italian Social Republic in the Mediterranean, Middle East and African theaters until May 1945.\nIn June 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union. Despite destroying thousands of Soviet aircraft, the Luftwaffe failed to destroy the Red Air Force altogether. Lacking strategic bombers (the very \"Ural bombers\" that Wever had asked for six years before) the Luftwaffe could not strike at Soviet production-centres regularly or with the needed force. The Axis and Soviet air operations during Operation Barbarossa consumed vast numbers of men and planes. As the war dragged on, the Luftwaffe was eroded in strength. German defeats at the Battle of Stalingrad in 1942 and in the Battle of Kursk in 1943 ensured the gradual decline of the on the Eastern Front.\nBritish historian Frederick Taylor asserts that \"all sides bombed each other's cities during the war. Half a million Soviet citizens, for example, died from German bombing during the invasion and occupation of Russia. That's roughly equivalent to the number of German citizens who died from Allied raids.\"\nThe Luftwaffe defended German-occupied Europe against the growing offensive power of RAF Bomber Command and, starting in the summer of 1942, the steadily building strength of the United States Army Air Forces. The mounting demands of the Defence of the Reich campaign gradually destroyed the Luftwaffe's fighter arm. Despite its belated use of advanced turbojet and rocket-propelled aircraft for bomber-destroyer duties, it was overwhelmed by Allied numbers and a lack of trained pilots and fuel. A last-ditch attempt, known as Operation Bodenplatte, to win air superiority on 1 January 1945 failed. After the \"Bodenplatte\" effort, the Luftwaffe ceased to be an effective fighting force.\nGerman day- and night-fighter pilots claimed more than 70,000 aerial victories during World War II. Of these, an estimated 745 victories were attributed to Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighters. Flak shot down 25,000\u201330,000 Allied planes. Broken down according to the different Allied forces, about 25,000 were American planes, about 20,000 British, 46,100 Soviet, 1,274 French, 375 Polish, and 81 Dutch as well as aircraft from other Allied nationalities.\nThe highest-scoring day-fighter pilot was Erich Hartmann with 352 confirmed kills, of which all but 7 were on the Eastern front against the Soviets. The leading aces in the west were Hans-Joachim Marseille with 158 kills (most of which were against British Commonwealth forces in the Desert campaign), and Georg-Peter Eder with 56 kills of aircraft from the USAAF (of a total of 78). The most successful night-fighter pilot, Heinz-Wolfgang Schnaufer, is credited with 121 kills. 103 German fighter pilots shot down more than 100 enemy aircraft for a total of roughly 15,400 aerial victories. Roughly a further 360 pilots claimed between 40 and 100 aerial victories for round about 21,000 victories. Another 500 fighter pilots claimed between 20 and 40 victories for a total of 15,000 victories. Part of the reason German pilots scored such high victory totals was that they were in combat for the duration of the war-unlike the Allies, who rotated their flyers out of combat after a certain amount of time to recuperate or to impart their skills in training other pilots - German pilots flew until they were killed, captured, or too badly wounded to keep flying. It is relatively certain that 2,500 German fighter pilots attained ace status, having achieved at least five aerial victories. These achievements were honored with 453 German single and twin-engine (Messerschmitt Bf 110) day-fighter pilots receiving the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross. Intense personal rivalry may have played an important role in motivating high-performing aces (who scored the vast majority of aerial victories). Public recognition in the form of medals and mentions in the army bulletin spurred efforts of peers who had previously flown with award-winners\n. 85 night-fighter pilots, including 14 crew members, were awarded the Knight's Cross. Some bomber pilots were also highly successful. \"Stuka\" and pilot Hans-Ulrich Rudel flew 2,530 ground-attack missions and claimed the destruction of more than 519 tanks and a battleship, among others. He became the most highly decorated German serviceman of the Second World War. Bomber pilot Hansgeorg B\u00e4tcher flew more than 658 combat missions, destroying numerous ships and other targets.\nLuftwaffe losses, on the other hand, were high as well. The estimated total number of destroyed and damaged for the war totalled 76,875 aircraft. Of these, about 43,000 were lost in combat, the rest in operational accidents and during training. By type, losses totalled 21,452 fighters, 12,037 bombers, 15,428 trainers, 10,221 twin-engine fighters, 5,548 ground attack craft, 6,733 reconnaissance planes, and 6,141 transports.\nAccording to the General Staff of the the losses of the flight personnel until February 1945 amounted to:\nAccording to official statistics, total Luftwaffe casualties, including ground personnel, amounted to 138,596 killed and 156,132 missing through 31 January 1945.\nOmissions and failures.\nLack of aerial defence.\nThe failure of the Luftwaffe in the Defence of the Reich campaign was a result of a number of factors. The Luftwaffe lacked an effective air defence system early in the war. Hitler's foreign policy had pushed Germany into war before these defences could be fully developed. The Luftwaffe was forced to improvise and construct its defences during the war.\nThe daylight actions over German-controlled territory were sparse in 1939\u20131940. The responsibility of the defence of German air space fell to the (air district commands). The defence systems relied mostly on the \"flak\" arm. The defences were not coordinated and communication was poor. This lack of understanding between the flak and flying branches of the defence would plague the Luftwaffe throughout the war. Hitler, in particular, wanted the defence to rest on anti-aircraft artillery as it gave the civilian population a \"psychological crutch\" no matter how ineffective the weapons.\nMost of the battles fought by the Luftwaffe on the Western Front were against the RAF's \"Circus\" raids and the occasional daylight raid into German air space. This was a fortunate position since the Luftwaffe's strategy of focusing its striking power on one front started to unravel with the failure of the invasion of the Soviet Union. The \"peripheral\" strategy of the Luftwaffe between 1939 and 1940 had been to deploy its fighter defences at the edges of Axis occupied territory, with little protecting the inner depths. Moreover, the front line units in the West were complaining about the poor numbers and performance of aircraft. Units complained of lack of aircraft with all-weather capabilities and the \"lack of climbing power of the Bf 109\". The Luftwaffe's technical edge was slipping as the only formidable new aircraft in the German arsenal was the Focke-Wulf Fw 190. Milch was to assist Udet with aircraft production increases and the introduction of more modern types of fighter aircraft. However, they explained at a meeting of the Reich Industrial Council on 18 September 1941 that the new next-generation aircraft had failed to materialise, and production of obsolete types had to continue to meet the growing need for replacements.\nThe buildup of the (\"Fighter Force\") was too rapid and its quality suffered. It was not put under a unified command until 1943, which also affected the performance of the nine fighter wings in existence in 1939. No further units were formed until 1942, and the years of 1940\u20131941 were wasted. The OKL failed to construct a strategy; instead, its command style was reactionary, and its measures not as effective without thorough planning. This was particularly apparent with the \"Sturmb\u00f6ck\" squadrons, formed to replace the increasingly ineffective twin-engined heavy fighter wings as the primary defence against USAAF daylight raids. The flew Fw 190A fighters armed with heavy 20mm and 30mm cannon to destroy heavy bombers, but this increased the weight and affected the performance of the Fw 190 at a time when the aircraft were meeting large numbers of equal if not superior Allied types.\nDaytime aerial defence against the USAAF's strongly defended heavy bomber forces, particularly the Eighth Air Force and the Fifteenth Air Force, had its successes through the calendar year of 1943. But at the start of 1944, Eighth AF commander Jimmy Doolittle made a major change in offensive fighter tactics, which defeated the Luftwaffe's day fighter force from that time onwards. Steadily increasing numbers of the superlative North American P-51 Mustang single-engine fighter, leading the USAAF's bombers into German airspace defeated first the wings, then the Fw 190A Sturmb\u00f6cke.\nDevelopment and equipment.\nIn terms of technological development, the failure to develop a long-range bomber and capable long-range fighters during this period left the Luftwaffe unable to conduct a meaningful strategic bombing campaign throughout the war. However, Germany at that time suffered from limitations in raw materials such as oil and aluminum, which meant that there were insufficient resources for much beyond a tactical air force: given these circumstances, the Luftwaffe's reliance on tactical mid-range, twin-engined medium bombers and short-range dive-bombers was a pragmatic choice of strategy. It might also be argued that the Luftwaffe's medium and heavy bomber wings were perfectly capable of attacking strategic targets, but the lack of capable long-range escort fighters left the bombers unable to carry out their missions effectively against determined and well-organised fighter opposition.\nThe greatest failure for the , however, was being saddled with an aircraft intended as a capable four-engined heavy bomber: the perpetually troubled Heinkel He 177, whose engines were prone to catch fire in flight. Of the three parallel proposals from the Heinkel engineering departments for a four-engined version of the A-series He 177 by February 1943, one of these being the Heinkel firm's \"Amerikabomber\" candidate, only one, the , emerged in the concluding months of 1943. Only three airworthy prototypes of the B-series He 177 design were produced by early 1944, by which point the Avro Lancaster, the most successful RAF heavy bomber, was already in widespread service.\nAnother failure of procurement and equipment was the lack of a dedicated naval air arm. Felmy had already expressed a desire to build a naval air arm to support operations in the Atlantic and British waters. Britain was dependent on food and raw materials from its Empire and North America. Felmy pressed this case firmly throughout 1938 and 1939, and, on 31 October 1939, Erich Raeder sent a strongly worded letter to G\u00f6ring in support of such proposals. The early-war twin-engined Heinkel He 115 floatplane and Dornier Do 18 flying boat were too slow and short-ranged. The then-contemporary Blohm &amp; Voss BV 138 (\"seadragon\") flying boat became the Luftwaffe's primary seaborne maritime patrol platform, with nearly 300 examples built; it had a maximum range. Another Blohm und Voss design of 1940, the enormous, 46-meter wingspan Blohm &amp; Voss BV 222 maritime patrol flying boat was capable of a range at maximum endurance. The Dornier Do 217 would have been ideal as a land-based choice but suffered production problems. Raeder also complained about the poor standard of aerial torpedoes, although their design was the responsibility of the , even considering production of the Japanese Type 91 torpedo used in the Attack on Pearl Harbor as the LT 850 by August 1942.\nWithout specialised naval or land-based, purpose-designed maritime patrol aircraft, the Luftwaffe was forced to improvise. The Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor \u2013 developed as a civilian airliner \u2013 lacked the structural strength for combat maneuvering at lower altitudes, making it unsuitable for use as a bomber in maritime patrol duties. The Condor lacked speed, armor and bomb load capacity. Sometimes the fuselage literally \"broke its back\" or a wing panel dropped loose from the wing root after a hard landing. Nevertheless, it was adapted for the long-range reconnaissance and anti-shipping roles and, between August 1940 and February 1941, Fw 200s sank 85 vessels for a claimed total of 363,000 GRT. Had the Luftwaffe focused on naval aviation \u2013 particularly maritime patrol aircraft with long range, Germany might well have been in a position to win the Battle of the Atlantic. However, Raeder and the failed to press for naval air power until the war began, mitigating the Luftwaffe's responsibility. At the same time G\u00f6ring regarded any other branch of the German military developing its own aviation as an encroachment on his authority and continually frustrated the navy's attempts to build its own airpower.\nThe absence of a strategic bomber force for the Luftwaffe, following Wever's death in 1936 and the end of the Ural bomber programme was not addressed until the authorisation of the \"Bomber B\" design competition in July 1939, which sought to replace the medium bomber force with which the Luftwaffe would begin the war, and the partly achieved high-speed medium bomber concept with more advanced, twin-engined high-speed bomber aircraft fitted with pairs of relatively \"high-power\" engines of and upwards as a follow-on to the earlier project, that would also be able to function as shorter-range heavy bombers.\nThe spring 1942 programme sought to produce strategic bomber designs for the Luftwaffe to directly attack the United States from Europe or the Azores. Inevitably, both the \"Bomber B\" and programmes were victims of the continued emphasis of the combined military's insistence for its Luftwaffe air arm to support the as its primary mission, and the damage to the German aviation industry from Allied bomber attacks.\nChallenges in directly addressing combat pilots' issues.\nThe RLM's apparent lack of a dedicated \"technical-tactical\" department, that would have directly been in contact with combat pilots to assess their needs for weaponry upgrades and tactical advice, had never been seriously envisioned as a critically ongoing necessity in the planning of the original German air arm. The RLM did have its own \"Technisches Amt\" (T-Amt) department to handle aviation technology issues, but this was tasked with handling all aviation technology issues in Nazi Germany, both military and civilian in nature, and also not known to have ever had any clear and actively administrative and consultative links with the front-line forces established for such purposes. On the front-line combat side of the issue, and for direct contact with the German aviation firms making the Luftwaffe's warplanes, the Luftwaffe did have its own reasonably effective system of four military aviation test facilities, or located at three coastal sites \u2013 Peenem\u00fcnde-West (also incorporating a separate facility in nearby Karlshagen), Tarnewitz and Travem\u00fcnde \u2013 and the central inland site of Rechlin, itself first established as a military airfield in late August 1918 by the German Empire, with the four-facility system commanded later in World War II by Edgar Petersen. However, due to lack of co-ordination between the RLM and the OKL, all fighter and bomber development was oriented toward short-range aircraft, as they could be produced in greater numbers, rather than quality long-range aircraft, something that put the Luftwaffe at a disadvantage as early as the Battle of Britain. The \"ramp-up\" to production levels required to fulfill the Luftwaffe's front-line needs was also slow, not reaching maximum output until 1944.\nProduction of fighters was not given priority until the Emergency Fighter Program was begun in 1944; Adolf Galland commented that this should have occurred at least a year earlier. Galland also pointed to the mistakes and challenges made in the development of the Messerschmitt Me 262 including the protracted development time required for its Junkers Jumo 004 jet engines to achieve reliability. German combat aircraft types that were first designed and flown in the mid-1930s had become obsolete, yet were kept in production, in particular the Ju 87 Stuka, and the Bf 109, because there were no well-developed replacement designs.\nProduction failures.\nThe failure of German production was evident from the start of the Battle of Britain. By the end of 1940, the Luftwaffe had suffered heavy losses and needed to regroup. Deliveries of new aircraft were insufficient to meet the drain on resources; the Luftwaffe, unlike the RAF, was failing to expand its pilot and aircraft numbers. This was partly owing to production planning failures before the war and the demands of the army. Nevertheless, the German aircraft industry was being outproduced in 1940. In terms of fighter aircraft production, the British exceeded their production plans by 43%, while the Germans remained 40% \"behind\" target by summer 1940. In fact, German production in fighters fell from 227 to 177 per month between July and September 1940. One of the many reasons for the failure of the Luftwaffe in 1940 was that it did not have the operational and material means to destroy the British aircraft industry, something that the much-anticipated \"Bomber B\" design competition was intended to address.\nThe so-called \"G\u00f6ring programme\", had largely been predicated on the defeat of the Soviet Union in 1941. After the 's failure in front of Moscow, industrial priorities for a possibility in increasing aircraft production were largely abandoned in favor to support the army's increased attrition rates and heavy equipment losses. Milch's reforms expanded production rates. In 1941 an average of 981 aircraft (including 311 fighters) were produced each month. In 1942 this rose to 1,296 aircraft of which 434 were fighters. Milch's planned production increases were initially opposed. But in June, he was granted materials for 900 fighters per month as the average output. By the summer of 1942, the operational force had recovered from a low of 39% (44% for fighters and 31% for bombers) in the winter of 1941\u20131942, to 69% by late June (75% for fighters and 66% for bombers) in 1942. However, after increased commitments in the east, overall operational ready rates fluctuated between 59% and 65% for the remaining year. Throughout 1942 the Luftwaffe was out produced in fighter aircraft by 250% and in twin-engine aircraft by 196%.\nThe appointment of Albert Speer as Minister of Armaments increased production of existing designs and the few new designs that had originated from earlier in the war. However, the intensification of Allied bombing caused the dispersion of production and prevented an efficient acceleration of expansion. German aviation production reached about 36,000 combat aircraft for 1944. However, by the time this was achieved the Luftwaffe lacked the fuel and trained pilots to make this achievement worthwhile.\nThe failure to maximise production immediately after the failures in the Soviet Union and North Africa ensured the Luftwaffe's effective defeat in the period of September 1943 \u2013 February 1944. Despite the tactical victories won, they failed to achieve a decisive victory. By the time production reached acceptable levels, as so many other factors had for the Luftwaffe \u2013 and for the entire 's weapons and ordnance technology as a whole \u2013 late in the war, it was \"too little, too late\".\nEngine development.\nBy the late 1930s, airframe construction methods had progressed to the point where airframes could be built to any required size, especially in Germany with aircraft like the Dornier Do X flying boat and the Junkers G 38 airliner. However, powering such designs was a major challenge. Mid-1930s aero engines were limited to about 600\u00a0hp and the first 1000\u00a0hp engines were just entering the prototype stage\u00a0\u2013 for Nazi Germany's then-new Luftwaffe air arm, this meant liquid-cooled inverted V12 designs like the Daimler-Benz DB 601.\nNazi Germany's initial need for substantially more powerful aviation engines originated with the private venture Heinkel He 119 high-speed reconnaissance design, and the Messerschmitt Me 261 for maritime reconnaissance duties. To give enough power in each engine installation, Daimler-Benz coupled two DB 601 engines as single \"power system\" with the propeller gear reduction housing across the front ends of the two engines. The combined powerplant, known as the DB 606, gave maximum output in February 1937, for a total weight of around 1.5 tonnes.\nDaimler-Benz's was at the same time developing a 1,500\u00a0kW class X-configuration engine design resulting in the twenty-four cylinder Daimler-Benz DB 604 (four banks of six cylinders each). Possessing essentially the same displacement of as the initial version of the liquid-cooled Junkers Jumo 222 multibank engine, six banks of four inline cylinders apiece instead; coincidentally, both the original Jumo 222 design and the DB 604 each weighed about a third less (at some of dry weight) than the DB 606. The DB 604's protracted development was diverting valuable German aviation powerplant research resources, and with more development of the \"twinned-DB 605\" based DB 610 coupled engine (itself initiated in June 1940 with a top output level of , and brought together in the same way \u2013 with the same all-up weight of 1.5 tonnes \u2013 as the DB 606 had been) giving improved results at the time, the Reich Air Ministry stopped all work on the DB 604 in September 1942. Such \"coupled powerplants\" were the exclusive choice of power for the Heinkel He 177A \"Greif\" heavy bomber, mistasked from its beginnings in being intended to do moderate-angle \"dive bombing\" for a 30-meter wingspan class, heavy bomber design \u2013 the twin nacelles for a pair of DB 606s or 610s did reduce drag for such a combat \"requirement\", but the poor design of the He 177A's engine accommodations for these twin-crankcase \"power systems\" caused repeated outbreaks of engine fires, causing the \"dive bombing\" requirement for the He 177A to be cancelled by mid-September 1942.\nBMW worked on what was essentially an enlarged version of its highly successful BMW 801 design from the Focke-Wulf Fw 190A. This led to the 53.7-litre displacement BMW 802 in 1943, an eighteen-cylinder air-cooled radial, weighing matching that of the 24-cylinder liquid-cooled inline DB 606; and the even larger, 83.5-litre displacement BMW 803 28-cylinder liquid-cooled radial, which from post-war statements from BMW development personnel were each considered to be \"secondary priority\" development programmes at best. This situation with the 802 and 803 designs led to the company's engineering personnel being redirected to place all efforts on improving the 801 to develop it to its full potential. The BMW 801F radial development, through its use of features coming from the 801E subtype, was able to substantially exceed the over-1,500\u00a0kW output level.\nThe twinned-up Daimler-Benz DB 601-based, 1,750\u00a0kW output DB 606, and its more powerful descendant, the 2,130\u00a0kW output DB 605-based DB 610, weighing some 1.5 tonnes apiece, were the only 1,500\u00a0kW-plus output level aircraft powerplants to ever be produced by Germany for Luftwaffe combat aircraft, mostly for the Heinkel He 177A heavy bomber. Even the largest-displacement inverted V12 aircraft powerplant built in Germany, the 44.52-litre (2,717 cu. in.) Daimler-Benz DB 603, which saw widespread use in twin-engined designs, could not exceed 1,500\u00a0kW output without more development. By March 1940, even the DB 603 was being \"twinned-up\" as the 601/606 and 605/610 had been, to become their replacement \"power system\": this was the strictly experimental, approximately 1.8-tonne weight apiece, twin-crankcase DB 613; capable of over 2,570\u00a0kW (3,495 PS) output, but which never left its test phase.\nThe proposed over-1,500\u00a0kW output subtypes of German aviation industry's existing piston aviation engine designs\u2014which adhered to using just a single crankcase that \"were\" able to substantially exceed the aforementioned over-1,500\u00a0kW output level\u2014were the DB 603 LM (1,800\u00a0kW at take-off, in production), the DB 603 N (2,205\u00a0kW at take-off, planned for 1946) and the BMW 801F (1,765\u00a0kW (2,400 PS) engines. The pioneering nature of jet engine technology in the 1940s resulted in numerous development problems for both of Germany's major jet engine designs to see mass production, the Jumo 004 and BMW 003 (both axial flow designs), with the more powerful Heinkel HeS 011 never leaving the test phase.\nPersonnel and leadership.\nThe bomber arm was given preference and received the \"better\" pilots. Later, fighter pilot leaders were few in numbers as a result of this. As with the late shift to fighter production, the Luftwaffe pilot schools did not give the fighter pilot schools preference soon enough. The Luftwaffe, the OKW argued, was still an offensive weapon, and its primary focus was on producing bomber pilots. This attitude prevailed until the second half of 1943. During the Defence of the Reich campaign in 1943 and 1944, there were not enough commissioned fighter pilots and leaders to meet attrition rates; as the need arose to replace aircrew (as attrition rates increased), the quality of pilot training deteriorated rapidly. Later this was made worse by fuel shortages for pilot training caused by the Allied strategic bombing campaign against German oil production. Overall this meant reduced training on operational types, formation flying, gunnery training, and combat training, and a total lack of instrument training.\nAt the beginning of the war, commanders were replaced with younger commanders too quickly. These younger commanders had to learn \"in the field\" rather than entering a front-line post fully qualified. Training of formation leaders was not systematic until 1943, which was far too late, with the Luftwaffe already stretched. The Luftwaffe thus lacked a cadre of staff officers to set up new combat units with carefully selected and skilled combat personnel, and pass on experience.\nMoreover, Luftwaffe leadership from the start poached the training command, which undermined its ability to replace losses, while also planning for \"short sharp campaigns\", which did not pertain. Moreover, no plans were laid for night fighters. In fact, when protests were raised, Hans Jeschonnek, Chief of the General Staff of the Luftwaffe, said, \"First we've got to beat Russia, then we can start training!\"\nLuftwaffe ground forces.\nThe Luftwaffe was unusual among contemporary independent air forces in possessing an organic paratrooper force called . Established in 1938, they were deployed in parachute operations in 1940 and 1941 and participated in the Battle of Fort Eben-Emael and the Battle for The Hague (alongside the German Army's 22nd Air Landing Division) in May 1940, and en masse during the Battle of Crete in May 1941. However, more than 4,000 were killed during the Crete operation. The associated losses of aircraft and the belief that paratroops no longer enjoyed the advantage of surprise led to reduction in airborne operations. Afterwards, although continuing to be trained in parachute delivery, paratroopers were only used in a parachute role for smaller-scale operations, such as the rescue of Benito Mussolini in 1943. formations were mainly used as light infantry in all theatres of the war. Their losses up to February 1945 were 22,041 killed, 57,594 wounded and 44,785 missing.\nDuring 1942 surplus Luftwaffe personnel was used to form Luftwaffe Field Divisions, standard infantry divisions that were used chiefly as rear echelon units to free up front line troops. From 1943, the Luftwaffe also had an armoured division called \"Fallschirm-Panzer\" Division 1 Hermann G\u00f6ring, which was expanded to a in 1944.\nGround support and combat units from the (RAD), the (LSP), the National Socialist Flyers Corps (NSFK), and the National Socialist Motor Corps (NSKK) were also put at the Luftwaffe's disposal during the war. In 1942 56 RAD companies served with the Luftwaffe in the West as airfield construction troops. In 1943 420 RAD companies were trained as crews of anti-aircraft artillery (AAA) and posted to existing Luftwaffe AAA battalions in the homeland. At the end of the war, these units were also fighting Allied tanks. Beginning in 1939 with a transport regiment, the NSKK had in 1942 a complete division-sized transportation unit serving the Luftwaffe, the serving in France and at the Eastern front. The overwhelming number of its 12,000 members were Belgian, Dutch, and French collaborators.\nWar crimes.\nForced labour.\nIn 1943 and 1944, aircraft production was moved to concentration camps in order to alleviate labour shortages and to protect production from Allied air raids. The two largest aircraft factories in Germany were located at Mauthausen-Gusen and Mittelbau-Dora concentration camps. Aircraft parts were also manufactured at Flossenb\u00fcrg, Buchenwald, Dachau, Ravensbr\u00fcck, Gross-Rosen, Natzweiler, Herzogenbusch, and Neuengamme. In 1944 and 1945, as many as 90,000 concentration prisoners worked in the aviation industry, and were about one tenth of the concentration camp population over the winter of 1944\u201345. Partly in response to the Luftwaffe's demand for more forced labourers to increase fighter production, the concentration camp more than doubled between mid-1943 (224,000) and mid-1944 (524,000). Part of this increase was due to the deportation of Hungarian Jews; the programme was used to justify the deportations to the Hungarian government. Of the 437,000 Hungarian Jews deported between May and July 1944, about 320,000 were gassed on arrival at Auschwitz and the remainder forced to work. Only 50,000 survived.\nAlmost 1,000 fuselages of the jet fighter Messerschmitt Me 262 were produced at Gusen, a subcamp of Mauthausen and a brutal labour camp, where the average life expectancy was six months. By 1944, one-third of production at the crucial Regensburg plant that produced the Bf 109, the backbone of the Luftwaffe fighter arm, originated in Gusen and Flossenb\u00fcrg alone. Synthetic oil was produced from shale oil deposits by prisoners of Mittlebau-Dora as part of Operation Desert directed by Edmund Geilenberg in order to make up for the decrease in oil production due to Allied bombing. For oil production, three subcamps were constructed and 15,000 prisoners forced to work in the plant. More than 3,500 people died. Vaivara concentration camp in Estonia was also established for shale oil extraction; about 20,000 prisoners worked there and more than 1,500 died at Vaivara.\nLuftwaffe airfields were frequently maintained using forced labour. Thousands of inmates from five subcamps of Stutthof worked on the airfields. Airfields and bases near several other concentration camps and ghettos were constructed or maintained by prisoners. On the orders of the Luftwaffe, prisoners from Buchenwald and Herzogenbusch were forced to defuse bombs that had fallen around D\u00fcsseldorf and Leeuwarden respectively.\nThousands of Luftwaffe personnel worked as concentration camp guards. Auschwitz included a munitions factory guarded by Luftwaffe soldiers; 2,700 Luftwaffe personnel worked as guards at Buchenwald. Dozens of camps and subcamps were staffed primarily by Luftwaffe soldiers. According to the \"Encyclopedia of Camps and Ghettos\", it was typical for camps devoted to armaments production to be run by the branch of the that used the products. In 1944, many Luftwaffe soldiers were transferred to concentration camps to alleviate personnel shortages.\nMassacres.\nLuftwaffe paratroopers committed many war crimes in Crete following the Battle of Crete, including the Alikianos executions, the Massacre of Kondomari, and the Razing of Kandanos. Several Luftwaffe divisions, including the 1st Parachute Division, 2nd Parachute Division, 4th Parachute Division, 19th Luftwaffe Field Division, 20th Luftwaffe Field Division and the 1st Division, committed war crimes in Italy, murdering hundreds of civilians.\nLuftwaffe troops participated in the murder of Jews imprisoned in ghettos in Eastern Europe. For example, they assisted in the murder of 2,680 Jews at the Nemirov ghetto, participated in a series of massacres at the Opoczno ghetto, and helped to liquidate the D\u0119blin\u2013Irena Ghetto by deporting thousands of Jews to Treblinka extermination camp. Between 1942 and 1944, two Luftwaffe security battalions were stationed in the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest for operations. Encouraged by G\u00f6ring, they murdered thousands of Jews and other civilians. Luftwaffe soldiers frequently executed Polish civilians at random with baseless accusations of being \"Bolshevik agents\", in order to keep the population in line, or as reprisal for partisan activities. The performance of the troops was measured by the body count of people murdered. 10,000 Luftwaffe troops were stationed on the Eastern Front for such \"anti-partisan\" operations.\nHuman experimentation.\nThroughout the war, concentration camp prisoners were forced to serve as human subjects in testing Luftwaffe equipment. Some of these experiments were carried out by Luftwaffe personnel and others were performed by the SS on the orders of the OKL.\nIn 1941, experiments with the intent of discovering how to prevent and treat hypothermia were carried out for the Luftwaffe, which had lost aircrew to immersion hypothermia after ditchings. The experiments were conducted at Dachau and Auschwitz. Sigmund Rascher, a Luftwaffe doctor based at Dachau, published the results at the 1942 medical conference entitled \"Medical Problems Arising from Sea and Winter\". Of about 400 prisoners forced to participate in cold-water experiments, 80 to 90 were killed.\nIn early 1942, prisoners at Dachau were used by Rascher in experiments to perfect ejection seats at high altitudes. A low-pressure chamber containing these prisoners was used to simulate conditions at altitudes of up to . It was rumored that Rascher performed vivisections on the brains of victims who survived the initial experiment. Of the 200 subjects, 80 died from the experimentation, and the others were executed. Eugen Hagen, head doctor of the Luftwaffe, infected inmates of Natzweiler concentration camp with typhus in order to test the efficacy of proposed vaccines.\nAerial bombing of non-military targets.\nNo positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed prior to or during World War II. This is also why no Luftwaffe officers were prosecuted at the post-World War II Allied war crime trials for the aerial raids.\nThe bombing of Wielu\u0144 was an air raid on the Polish town of Wielu\u0144 by the Luftwaffe on 1 September 1939. The Luftwaffe started bombing Wielu\u0144 at 04:40, five minutes before the shelling of Westerplatte, which has traditionally been considered the beginning of World War II in Europe. The air raid on the town was one of the first aerial bombings of the war. About 1,300 civilians were killed, hundreds were injured, and 90 percent of the town centre was destroyed. The casualty rate was more than twice as high as Guernica. A 1989 Sender Freies Berlin documentary stated that there were no military or industrial targets in the area, except for a small sugar factory in the outskirts of the town. Furthermore, Trenkner stated that German bombers first destroyed the town's hospital. Two attempts, in 1978 and 1983, to prosecute individuals for the bombing of the Wielu\u0144 hospital were dismissed by West German judges when prosecutors stated that the pilots had been unable to make out the nature of the structure due to fog.\nOperation Retribution was the April 1941 German bombing of Belgrade, the capital of Yugoslavia. The bombing deliberately targeted the killing of civilians as punishment and resulted in 17,000 civilian deaths. It occurred in the first days of the German-led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia. The operation commenced on 6 April and concluded on 7 or 8 April, resulting in the paralysis of Yugoslav civilian and military command and control, widespread destruction in the centre of the city and many civilian casualties. Following the Yugoslav capitulation, Luftwaffe engineers conducted a bomb damage assessment in Belgrade. The report stated that of bombs were dropped, with 10 to 14 percent being incendiaries. It listed all the targets of the bombing, which included: the royal palace, the war ministry, military headquarters, the central post office, the telegraph office, passenger and goods railway stations, power stations, and barracks. It also mentioned that seven aerial mines were dropped and that areas in the centre and northwest of the city had been destroyed, comprising 20 to 25 percent of its total area. Some aspects of the bombing remain unexplained, particularly the use of aerial mines. In contrast, Pavlowitch states that almost 50 percent of housing in Belgrade was destroyed. After the invasion, the Germans forced between 3,500 and 4,000 Jews to collect rubble that was caused by the bombing.\nThe biggest attacks at civilian targets occurred in the Battle of Britain when the Luftwaffe attacked the British Isles and primarily hit non military targets. This resulted in over 22,000 civilians being killed and over 30,000 being wounded.\nTrials.\nSeveral prominent Luftwaffe commanders were convicted of war crimes, including General Alexander L\u00f6hr and Field Marshal Albert Kesselring.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17886", "revid": "7199485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17886", "title": "Lafora disease", "text": "Terminal recessive genetic condition\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLafora disease is a rare, autosomal recessive genetic disorder which results in myoclonus epilepsy and usually results in death several years after the onset of symptoms. The disease is characterized by the accumulation of inclusion bodies, known as Lafora bodies, within the cytoplasm of the cells. The Lafora bodies are in the heart, liver, muscle, and skin. Lafora disease is also a neurodegenerative disease that causes impairment in the development of brain (cerebral) cortical neurons and is a glycogen metabolism disorder.\nLafora disease (LD) was described by the Spanish neuropathologist Gonzalo Rodr\u00edguez Lafora (1886\u20131971) in 1911, while directing the Neuropathology Section at the Government Hospital for Mental Insane (current NIH, US).\nLafora disease is very rare in children, adolescents and adults worldwide. However, it has a higher incidence among children and adolescents with ancestry from regions where consanguineous relationships are common, namely the Mediterranean (North Africa, Southern Europe), the Middle East, India, and Pakistan. Dogs can also have the condition. In dogs, Lafora disease can spontaneously occur in any breed, but the miniature wire-haired dachshund, bassett hound, and beagle are predisposed.\nMost patients with this disease do not live past the age of twenty-five, and it often leads to death within ten years of symptoms appearing. Late onset symptoms of this disease can begin at any age depending on the genes affected. At present, there is no cure for this disease, but there are ways to deal with symptoms through treatments and medications. There are five patient organizations worldwide that share https:// and support the Lafora patient community.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSymptoms of Lafora disease begin to develop during the early adolescent years, and symptoms progress as time passes. Prior to this, there is generally no indication of the presence of the disease, though in a few cases, the disease presents as a learning disorder around five years of age. In extremely rare cases, symptoms may not show at all until as late as the third decade of life, though these cases have slower progression than typical LD. The most common feature of Lafora disease is seizures that have been reported mainly as occipital seizures and myoclonic seizures with some cases of generalized tonic-clonic seizures, atypical absence seizures, and atonic and complex partial seizures. Other symptoms common with the seizures are drop attacks, ataxia, temporary blindness, visual hallucinations, and a quickly-developing and dramatic dementia.\nOther common signs and symptoms associated with Lafora disease are behavioral changes due to the frequency of seizures. Over time those affected with Lafora disease have brain changes that cause confusion, speech difficulties, depression, decline in intellectual function, impaired judgement and impaired memory. If areas of the cerebellum are affected by seizures, it is common to see problems with speech, coordination, and balance in Lafora patients.\nFor dogs that are affected with Lafora disease, common symptoms are rapid shuddering, shaking, or jerking of the canine's head backwards, high pitched vocalizations that could indicate the dog is panicking, seizures, and \u2013 as the disease progresses \u2013 dementia, blindness, and loss of balance.\nWithin ten years of developing symptoms, life expectancy declines. People who advance to adulthood tend to lose their ability to do daily tasks by themselves, which can require comprehensive care. If their symptoms progress extremely quickly or at an early age, patients receive comprehensive care, which \u2013 besides medication \u2013 means support during daily activities both physically and mentally. \nGenetics.\nLafora disease is an autosomal recessive disorder, caused by loss of function mutations in either the laforin glycogen phosphatase gene (\"EPM2A\") or malin E3 ubiquitin ligase gene (\"NHLRC1\"). These mutations in either of these two genes lead to polyglucosan formation or lafora body formation in the cytoplasm of heart, liver, muscle, and skin.\n'Graph 1' shows the data for 250 families that have been affected by Lafora disease and the distribution of cases around the world. The graph shows that there is a very large number of cases in Italy because of a higher occurrence of EPM2A gene mutation compared to any other country in the world.\n'Graph 2' shows the percentage distribution of the cases from either an EPM2A gene mutation or an EPM2B (NHLRC1) gene mutation. 42% of the cases are caused by EPM2A and 58% are caused by EPM2B (NHLRC1). The most common mutation on the EPM2A gene is the R241X mutation. This genetic mutation is the cause for 17% of the EPM2A-caused Lafora disease cases.\n\"EPM2A\" codes for the protein laforin, a dual-specificity phosphatase that acts on carbohydrates by taking phosphates off.\n\"NHLRC1\" encodes the protein malin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, that regulates the amount of laforin.\nLaforin is essential for making the normal structure of a glycogen molecule. When the mutation occurs on the \"EPM2A\" gene, laforin protein is down-regulated and less of this protein is present or none is made at all. If there is also a mutation in the \"NHLRC1\" gene that makes the protein malin, then laforin cannot be regulated and thus less of it is made.\nLess laforin means more phosphorylation of glycogen, causing conformational changes, rendering it insoluble, leading to an accumulation of misformed glycogen, which has neurotoxic effects. \nIn a laforin mutation, glycogen would be hyperphosphorylated; this has been confirmed in laforin knock-out mice.\nResearch literature also suggests that over-activity of glycogen synthase, the key enzyme in synthesizing glycogen, can lead to the formation of polyglucosans and it can be inactivated by phosphorylation at various amino acid residues by many molecules, including GSK-3beta, Protein phosphatase 1, and malin.\nAs defective enzyme molecules participate in the production of these molecules (GSK-3beta, PP1, and malin), excessive glycogen synthase activity occurs in combination with mutations in laforin that phosphorylates the excess glycogen being made, rendering it insoluble. The key player missing is ubiquitin. It is not able to degrade the excess amount of the insoluble lafora bodies. Since mutations arise in malin, an e3 ubiquitin ligase, this directly interferes with the degradation of laforin, causing the laforin not to be degraded. In this case laforin is then hyperphosphorylated.\nLafora bodies.\nLafora disease is distinguished by the presence of inclusions called Lafora bodies within the cytoplasm of cells. Lafora bodies are aggregates of polyglucosans or abnormally shaped glycogen molecules. Glycogen in Lafora disease patients has abnormal chain lengths, which causes them to be insoluble, accumulate, and have a neurotoxic effect.\nFor glycogen to be soluble, there must be short chains and a high frequency of branching points, but this is not found in the glycogen in Lafora patients. LD patients have longer chains that have clustered arrangement of branch points that form crystalline areas of double helices making it harder for them to clear the blood-brain barrier. The glycogen in LD patients also has higher phosphate levels and is present in greater quantities.\nDiagnosis.\nLafora disease is diagnosed by conducting a series of tests by a neurologist, epileptologist (person who specializes in epilepsy), or geneticist. To confirm the diagnosis, an EEG, MRI, and genetic testing are needed. A biopsy may be necessary as well to detect and confirm the presence of Lafora bodies in the skin.\nTreatment.\nThere is no cure for Lafora disease with treatment being limited to controlling seizures through anti-epileptic and anti-convulsant medications. The treatment is usually based on the individual's specific symptoms and the severity of those symptoms. Some examples of medications include valproate, levetiracetam, topiramate, benzodiazepines, or perampanel. Although the symptoms and seizures can be controlled for a long period by using anti-epileptic drugs, the symptoms will progress and patients lose their ability to perform daily activities leading to the survival rate of approximately 10 years after symptoms begin. Quality of life worsens as the years go on, with some patients requiring a feeding tube so that they can get the nutrition and medication they need in order to keep living, but not necessarily functioning. Recently Metformin is approved for the treatment.\nEpidemiology.\nAll the reports that have been published on Lafora disease have shown that the overall prevalence of the disease is about 4 cases per million individuals around the world. Lafora disease is much more prevalent in countries that have higher cases of inbreeding. Usually, these locations are geographically or culturally more isolated from the world at large.\nResearch.\nThe disease is named after Gonzalo Rodr\u00edguez Lafora (1886\u20131971), a Spanish neuropathologist who first recognized small inclusion bodies in Lafora patients in the early to mid 1900s.\nRecent research has investigated whether inhibition of glycogen synthesis through restriction of glucose intake could potentially stop the formation of the Lafora Bodies in neurons in laforin-deficient mice models while also reducing the chances of seizures.\nResearchers in the U.S., Canada, and Europe formed the Lafora Epilepsy Cure Initiative with funding from the National Institutes of Health. The group aims to interrupt the process of how the mutations in laforin and malin interfere with normal carbohydrate metabolism in mice models. \nSociety and culture.\nPatient organizations.\nThere are patient organizations in the United States (https://), Italy (https:// and https://), France (https://), and Spain (https://).\nhttps:// began as a website in the fall of 2007 as a means to share https:// with her family and friends. As the Gerber family connected with others affected by Lafora, they formed a patient advocacy organization in September 2009. Chelsea's Hope Lafora Children Research Fund is an IRS 501(c)3 non-profit organization, EIN: 27-1008382. The mission of Chelsea's Hope is to improve the lives of those affected by Lafora Disease and help accelerate the development of treatments.\nIn 2016, shortly before Chelsea's death, her mother Linda recorded a video sharing a day in their life. From myoclonus to a feeding tube replacement, viewers can learn what it means to live with Lafora Disease.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17887", "revid": "11851222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17887", "title": "Lassa fever", "text": "Viral disease spread by a type of mouse\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLassa fever, also known as Lassa hemorrhagic fever, is a type of viral hemorrhagic fever caused by the Lassa virus. Many of those infected by the virus do not develop symptoms. When symptoms occur, they typically include fever, weakness, headaches, vomiting, and muscle pains. Less commonly there may be bleeding from the mouth or gastrointestinal tract. The risk of death once infected is about one percent and frequently occurs within two weeks of the onset of symptoms. Of those who survive, about a quarter have hearing loss, which improves within three months in about half of these cases.\nLassa fever is usually initially spread to humans via contact with the urine or feces of an infected multimammate mouse. Spread can then occur via direct contact between people. Diagnosis based on symptoms is difficult. Confirmation is by laboratory testing to detect the virus's RNA, antibodies for the virus, or the virus itself in cell culture. Other conditions that may present similarly include Ebola, malaria, typhoid fever, and yellow fever. The Lassa virus is a member of the \"Arenaviridae\" family of viruses.\nThere is no vaccine. Prevention requires isolating those who are infected and decreasing contact with the mice. Other efforts to control the spread of disease include having a cat to hunt vermin, and storing food in sealed containers. Treatment is directed at addressing dehydration and improving symptoms. The antiviral medication ribavirin has been recommended, but evidence to support its use is weak.\nDescriptions of the disease date from the 1950s. The virus was first described in 1969 from a case in the town of Lassa, in Borno State, Nigeria. Lassa fever is relatively common in West Africa including the countries of Nigeria, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Ghana. There are about 300,000 to 500,000 cases which result in 5,000 deaths a year.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nOnset of symptoms is typically 7 to 21 days after exposure. These mild symptoms may include fever, tiredness, weakness, and headache. In 20% of people more severe symptoms such as bleeding gums, breathing problems, vomiting, chest pain, or dangerously low blood pressure may occur. Long term complications may include hearing loss. In women who are pregnant, miscarriage may occur with a likelihood of 95%. Lassa fever can be difficult to distinguish clinically from other viral hemorrhagic fevers, such as Ebola virus disease. A combination of pharyngitis, pain behind the sternum, presence of excess protein in the urine and fever can indicate Lassa fever with higher specificity.\nIn cases in which death occurs, this typically occurs within 14 days of onset. About 1% of all Lassa virus infections result in death. Approximately 15%-20% of those who have required hospitalization for Lassa fever die. The risk of death is greater in those who are pregnant. A \"Swollen baby syndrome\" may occur in newborns, infants and toddlers with pitting edema, abdominal distension and bleeding.\nCause.\nVirology.\nLassa virus is a member of the Arenaviridae, a family of negative-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses. Specifically it is an old world arenavirus, which is enveloped, single-stranded, and bi-segmented RNA. Lassa virus contains both a large and a small genome section, with seven lineages identified to date: Lineages I, II, and III from Nigeria; Lineage IV from Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia; Lineage V from Cote D\u2019Ivoire and Mali Lineage VI from Togo; and Lineage VII from Benin.\nSpread.\nLassa virus commonly spreads to humans from other animals, specifically the \"Natal multimammate mouse\" or African rat, also called the Natal multimammate rat (\"Mastomys natalensis\"). This is probably the most common mouse in equatorial Africa, common in human households and eaten as a delicacy in some areas.\nThe multimammate mouse can quickly produce a large number of offspring, tends to colonize human settlements, increasing the risk of rodent-human contact, and is found throughout the west, central and eastern parts of the African continent.\nOnce the mouse has become a carrier, it will excrete the virus throughout the rest of its lifetime through feces and urine creating ample opportunity for exposure. The virus is probably transmitted by contact with the feces or urine of animals accessing grain stores in residences. No study has proven presence in breast milk, but the high level of viremia suggests it may be possible.\nIndividuals who are at a higher risk of contracting the infection are those who live in rural areas where Mastomys are discovered, and where sanitation is not prevalent. Infection typically occurs by direct or indirect exposure to animal excrement through the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Inhalation of tiny particles of infectious material (aerosol) is believed to be the most significant means of exposure. It is possible to acquire the infection through broken skin or mucous membranes that are directly exposed to infectious material. Transmission from person to person has been established, presenting a disease risk for healthcare workers. The virus is present in urine for between three and nine weeks after infection, and it can be transmitted in semen for up to three months after becoming infected.\nDiagnosis.\nA range of laboratory investigations are performed, where possible, to diagnose the disease and assess its course and complications. The confidence of a diagnosis can be compromised if laboratory tests are not available. One comprising factor is the number of febrile illnesses present in Africa, such as malaria or typhoid fever that could potentially exhibit similar symptoms, particularly for non-specific manifestations of Lassa fever. In cases with abdominal pain, in countries where Lassa is common, Lassa fever is often misdiagnosed as appendicitis and intussusception which delays treatment with the antiviral ribavirin. In West Africa, where Lassa is most common, it is difficult to diagnose due to the absence of proper equipment to perform testing.\nThe United States FDA has yet to approve a widely validated laboratory test for Lassa, but there are tests that have been able to provide definitive proof of the presence of the LASV virus. These tests include cell cultures, PCR, ELISA antigen assays, plaque neutralization assays, and immunofluorescence essays. However, immunofluorescence essays provide less definitive proof of Lassa infection. An ELISA test for antigen and Immunoglobulin M antibodies give 88% sensitivity and 90% specificity for the presence of the infection. Other laboratory findings in Lassa fever include lymphocytopenia (low lymphocyte white blood cell count), thrombocytopenia (low platelets), and elevated aspartate transaminase levels in the blood. Lassa fever virus can also be found in cerebrospinal fluid.\nPrevention.\nControl of the \"Mastomys\" rodent population is impractical, so measures focus on keeping rodents out of homes and food supplies, encouraging effective personal hygiene, storing grain and other foodstuffs in rodent-proof containers, and disposing of garbage far from the home to help sustain clean households. Gloves, masks, laboratory coats, and goggles are advised while in contact with an infected person, to avoid contact with blood and body fluids. These issues in many countries are monitored by a department of public health. In less developed countries, these types of organizations may not have the necessary means to effectively control outbreaks.\nVaccine.\nThere is no vaccine for humans as of 2023. Researchers at the United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases facility had a promising vaccine candidate in 2002. They have developed a replication-competent vaccine against Lassa virus based on recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus vectors expressing the Lassa virus glycoprotein. After a single intramuscular injection, test primates have survived lethal challenge, while showing no clinical symptoms.\nTreatment.\nTreatment is directed at addressing dehydration and improving symptoms.\nMedications.\nThe antiviral medication ribavirin has been recommended, but evidence to support its use is weak. Some evidence has found that it may worsen outcomes in certain cases. Fluid replacement, blood transfusions, and medication for low blood pressure may be required. Intravenous interferon therapy has also been used.\nIndirect antivirals.\nA potential novel treatment, the NMT inhibitor, has been shown to completely inhibit lassa infection in cells based assays by targeting Z protein and SSP for degradation. Favipiravir, a nucleoside analogue, has been shown to be effective at treating Lassa fever in immunocompetent mouse, guinea pigs and macaques. A case report showed combination favipiravir with ribavirin is effective for lassa fever, with two patients survived. In vivo, the EC50 of favipiravir is 2.89 \u03bcg.mL\u22121and doses larger than 1200\u00a0mg twice a day should have the capability to strongly reduce the production infectious virus.\nPregnancy.\nWhen Lassa fever infects pregnant women late in their third trimester, inducing delivery is necessary for the mother to have a good chance of survival. This is because the virus has an affinity for the placenta and other highly vascular tissues. The fetus has only a one in ten chance of survival no matter what course of action is taken; hence, the focus is always on saving the life of the mother.\nPrognosis.\nAbout 15\u201320% of hospitalized people with Lassa fever will die from the illness. The overall case fatality rate is estimated to be 1%, but during epidemics, mortality can climb as high as 50%. The mortality rate is greater than 80% when it occurs in pregnant women during their third trimester; fetal death also occurs in nearly all those cases. Abortion decreases the risk of death to the mother. Some survivors experience lasting effects of the disease, and can include partial or complete deafness.\nBecause of treatment with ribavirin, fatality rates have declined.\nEpidemiology.\nThere are about 300,000 to 500,000 cases which result in 5,000 deaths a year. One estimate places the number as high as 3 million cases per year.\nEstimates of Lassa fever are complicated by the lack of easy-available diagnosis, limited public health surveillance infrastructure, and high clustering of incidence near high intensity sampling.\nThe infection affects females 1.2 times more than males. The age group predominantly infected is 21\u201330 years.\nGeography.\nLassa high risk areas are near the western and eastern extremes of West Africa. As of 2018, the Lassa belt includes Guinea, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Liberia. As of 2003, 10-16% of people in Sierra Leone and Liberia admitted to hospital had the virus. The case fatality rate for those who are hospitalized for the disease is about 15-20%. Research showed a twofold increase risk of infection for those living in close proximity to someone with infection symptoms within the last year.\nThe high risk areas cannot be well defined by any known biogeographical or environmental breaks except for the multimammate rat, particularly Guinea (Kindia, Faranah and Nz\u00e9r\u00e9kor\u00e9 regions), Liberia (mostly in Lofa, Bong, and Nimba counties), Nigeria (in about 10 of 36 states) and Sierra Leone (typically from Kenema and Kailahun districts). It is less common in the Central African Republic, Mali, Senegal and other nearby countries, and less common yet in Ghana and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Benin had its first confirmed cases in 2014, and Togo had its first confirmed cases in 2016.\nAs of 2013, the spread of Lassa outside of West Africa had been very limited. Twenty to thirty cases had been described in Europe, as being caused by importation through infected individuals. These cases found outside of West Africa were found to have a high fatality risk because of the delay of diagnosis and treatment due to being unaware of the risk associated with the symptoms. Imported cases have not manifested in larger epidemics outside of Africa due to a lack of human to human transmission in hospital settings. An exception had occurred in 2003 when a healthcare worker became infected before the person showed clear symptoms.\nIn October 2024, a resident of Iowa, United States has died due to Lassa fever following a trip to West Africa, as reported by the Iowa Department of Health and Human Services. Health officials indicate the person likely contracted Lassa fever\u2014transmissible through contact with infected body fluids or, potentially, with rodents while abroad, according to guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.\nNigeria.\n2018 outbreak.\nAn outbreak of Lassa fever occurred in Nigeria during 2018 and spread to 18 of the country's states; it was the largest outbreak of Lassa recorded. The outbreak primarily affected Nigeria, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, with cases reported since January 2018.\nAs of 25 February 2018, there were 1081 suspected cases and 90 reported deaths; 317 of the cases and 72 deaths were confirmed as Lassa which increased to a total of 431 reported cases in 2018. During the outbreak, a total of 3,498 infections were recorded, resulting in 171 deaths. Nigeria was the most severely impacted, accounting for over half of the total cases and fatalities. The World Health Organization (WHO) reported on 27 March 2018 that 1,081 suspected cases and 90 deaths had occurred. It was one of the most severe Lassa fever outbreaks in the region in recent years, exhausting a significant portion of the global emergency medical response resources.\nHealth organizations, including Doctors Without Borders and the WHO, collaborated with national governments to contain the outbreak through mass awareness campaigns, improved surveillance, and emergency medical interventions. In total, 2.1 million people received preventive health education, while emergency treatment centers were established across affected regions.\nNigeria was the hardest hit country, with 2,121 cases and 132 deaths reported. The outbreak affected 18 of its 36 states, with the highest cases recorded in Edo, Ondo, and Ebonyi States. The Nigerian Ministry of Health launched an extensive awareness campaign and deployed medical teams to affected areas. Emergency supplies, including ribavirin (an antiviral drug), were distributed, and treatment centers were set up in federal hospitals to manage severe cases.\n2019 outbreak.\nThe total cases in Nigeria in 2019 was 810 with 167 deaths, the largest case fatality rate (23.3%) until then.\n2020 outbreak.\nThe epidemic started from the second week of the January. By the tenth week the total number of cases has risen to 855 and deaths to 144, the case fatality rate of 16.8%.\n2021 outbreak.\nOn 8 December 2021, the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) was notified of the death of two persons from Lassa fever.\n2022 outbreak.\nThe epidemic took a new form, from 3 to 30 January 2022, 211 laboratory confirmed Lassa fever cases including 40 deaths (case fatality ratio: 19%) have been cumulatively reported in 14 of the 36 Nigerian states and the Federal Capital Territory across the country. In total from January until March, 132 deaths have been reported with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 19.1% which is lower than the CFR for the same period in 2021 (21.0%).\n2024 outbreak.\nIn October 2024, a resident of Iowa, United States, died from Lassa fever after traveling to West Africa, demonstrating the risk of international spread.\n2025 outbreak.\nNigeria is grappling with a severe Lassa fever outbreak, reporting 535 confirmed cases and 98 deaths across 14 states since January, with a case fatality rate of 18.3%. The disease spread to a patient who travelled to the UK, prompting contact tracing efforts in both countries. The Nigerian Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) issued a renewed advisory urging heightened awareness and preventative measures.\nLiberia.\nLassa fever is endemic in Liberia. From 1 January 2017 through 23 January 2018, 91 suspected cases were reported from six counties: Bong, Grand Bassa, Grand Kru, Lofa, Margibi, and Nimba. Thirty-three of these cases were laboratory confirmed, including 15 deaths (case fatality rate for confirmed cases = 45.4%).\nLiberia recorded 108 infections and 9 fatalities associated with 2018 Nigeria outbreak. The outbreak was concentrated in Lofa and Nimba Counties, where healthcare infrastructure was already fragile due to past epidemics. The Liberian Ministry of Health, supported by international partners, deployed mobile clinics and trained health workers to improve case detection and management.\nIn February 2020, a total of 24 confirmed cases with nine associated deaths has been reported from nine health districts in six counties. Grand Bossa and Bong counties account for 20 of the confirmed cases.\nOther countries.\nSierra Leone reported 129 infections, with 12 deaths, in 2018. The outbreak was especially severe in Kenema and Bo Districts, where local health authorities struggled with limited resources. Public health officials launched community awareness initiatives to educate citizens about hygiene practices to prevent further spread.\nGuinea experienced 98 cases and 8 fatalities, making it one of the least affected countries in the region in 2018. The outbreak was largely contained due to early intervention measures, including stringent border screenings and rapid response teams.\nHistory.\nThe disease was identified in Nigeria in 1969. It is named after the town of Lassa, where it was discovered.\nA prominent expert in the disease, Aniru Conteh, died from the disease.\nResearch.\nThe Lassa virus is one of several viruses identified by WHO as a likely cause of a future epidemic. They therefore list it for urgent research and development to develop new diagnostic tests, vaccines, and medicines.\nIn 2007, SIGA Technologies, studied a medication in guinea pig with Lassa fever. Work on a vaccine is continuing, with multiple approaches showing positive results in animal trials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17888", "revid": "50840026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17888", "title": "Leon Trotsky", "text": "Soviet politician and revolutionary (1879\u20131940)\nLev Davidovich Trotsky (n\u00e9\u00a0Bronstein; 7 November\u00a0[O.S. 26 October]\u00a01879 \u2013 21 August 1940), better known as Leon Trotsky, was a Russian revolutionary, Soviet politician and political theorist. He was a key figure in the 1905 Revolution, October Revolution of 1917, Russian Civil War, and the establishment of the Soviet Union, from which he was exiled in 1929 before his assassination in 1940. Trotsky and Vladimir Lenin were widely considered the two most prominent figures in the Soviet state from 1917 until Lenin's death in 1924. Ideologically a Marxist and a Leninist, Trotsky's ideas inspired a school of Marxism known as Trotskyism.\nTrotsky joined the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party in 1898, being arrested and exiled to Siberia for his activities. In 1902 he escaped to London, where he met Lenin. Trotsky initially sided with the Mensheviks against Lenin's Bolsheviks in the party's 1903 schism, but declared himself non-factional in 1904. During the 1905 Revolution, Trotsky was elected chairman of the Saint Petersburg Soviet. He was again exiled to Siberia, but escaped in 1907 and lived abroad. After the February Revolution of 1917, Trotsky joined the Bolsheviks and was elected chairman of the Petrograd Soviet. He helped to lead the October Revolution, and as the People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs negotiated the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, by which Russia withdrew from World War I. He served as People's Commissar for Military Affairs from 1918 to 1925, during which he built the Red Army and led it to victory in the civil war. In 1922 Lenin formed a bloc with Trotsky against the growing Soviet bureaucracy and proposed that he should become a deputy premier, but Trotsky declined. Beginning in 1923, Trotsky led the party's Left Opposition faction, which supported greater levels of industrialisation, voluntary collectivisation and party democratisation in a shared framework with the New Economic Policy.\nAfter Lenin's death in 1924, Trotsky emerged as a prominent critic of Joseph Stalin, who soon politically outmanoeuvred him. Trotsky was expelled from the Politburo in 1926 and from the party in 1927, exiled to Alma Ata in 1928 and deported in 1929. He lived in Turkey, France and Norway before settling in Mexico in 1937. In exile, Trotsky wrote polemics against Stalinism, advocating proletarian internationalism against Stalin's theory of socialism in one country. Trotsky's theory of permanent revolution held that the revolution could only survive if spread to more advanced capitalist countries. In \"The Revolution Betrayed\" (1936), he argued that the Soviet Union had become a \"degenerated workers' state\", and in 1938 founded the Fourth International as an alternative to the Comintern. After being sentenced to death in absentia at the Moscow show trials in 1936, Trotsky was assassinated in 1940 in Mexico City by Ram\u00f3n Mercader, a Stalinist agent.\nWritten out of official history under Stalin, Trotsky was one of the few of his rivals who were never politically rehabilitated by later Soviet leaders. In the Western world Trotsky emerged as a hero of the anti-Stalinist left for his defence of a more democratic, internationalist form of socialism against Stalinist totalitarianism, and for his intellectual contributions to Marxism. While some of his wartime actions are controversial, such as his ideological defence of the Red Terror and violent suppression of the Kronstadt rebellion, scholarship ranks Trotsky's leadership of the Red Army highly among historical figures, and he is credited for his major involvement with the military, economic, cultural and political development of the Soviet Union.\nChildhood and family (1879\u20131895).\nLev Davidovich Bronstein was born on 7 November 1879 in Yanovka, Kherson Governorate, Russian Empire (now known by Bereslavka, Ukraine), into a wealthy but illiterate Jewish farming family. He was the fifth child of David Leontyevich Bronstein (1847\u20131922), and Anna Lvovna (n\u00e9e Zhivotovskaya, 1850\u20131910). Trotsky's younger sister, Olga (1883\u20131941), also became a Bolshevik and Soviet politician, and married her fellow-Bolshevik Lev Kamenev.\nSome authors, notably Robert Service, claim Trotsky's childhood first name was the Yiddish \"Leiba\". However, the Trotskyist writer David North argues this is an assumption based on Trotsky's Jewish heritage, lacking documentary evidence, especially as Yiddish was not spoken by his family. Both North and the historian Walter Laqueur state Trotsky's childhood name was \"Lyova\", a standard Russian diminutive of \"Lev\". North draws a parallel between the speculation and the disproportionate scrutiny of Trotsky\u2019s Jewish heritage. The family spoke a mixture of Russian and Ukrainian (Surzhyk), not Yiddish. Although Trotsky acquired good proficiency in French, English, and German, he stated in his autobiography \"My Life\" that he was truly fluent only in Russian and Ukrainian. Raymond Molinier noted Trotsky spoke French fluently.\nWhen Trotsky was eight, his father sent him to Odessa for education. He enrolled in a Lutheran German-language school (St Paul's Realschule), which admitted students of various faiths and became increasingly Russified during his time there due to the Imperial government's Russification policy. Trotsky and his wife Natalia later registered their children as Lutheran, as Austrian law then required children to receive religious education \"in the faith of their parents\". Odessa, a bustling cosmopolitan port city, differed greatly from typical Russian cities and contributed to the development of young Trotsky's international outlook. He excelled academically, particularly in science and mathematics, and was a voracious reader, often disciplined for reading non-curriculum books during class.\nEarly political activities and life (1896\u20131917).\nRevolutionary activity and imprisonment (1896\u20131898).\nTrotsky became involved in revolutionary activities in 1896 after moving to the port town of Nikolayev (now Mykolaiv) on the Black Sea. Initially a \"narodnik\" (revolutionary agrarian socialist populist), he opposed Marxism but was converted by his future first wife, Aleksandra Sokolovskaya. He graduated from high school with first-class honours the same year. His father had intended him to become a mechanical engineer.\nTrotsky briefly attended Odessa University, studying engineering and mathematics. A university colleague noted his exceptional mathematical talent. However, bored with his studies, he increasingly focused on political philosophy and underground revolutionary activities. He dropped out in early 1897 to help to organise the South Russian Workers' Union in Nikolayev. Using the name \"Lvov\", he wrote and printed leaflets, distributed revolutionary pamphlets, and popularised socialist ideas among industrial workers and students.\nIn January 1898 over 200 union members, including Trotsky, were arrested. He spent the next two years in prison awaiting trial, first in Nikolayev, then Kherson, Odessa, and finally Moscow. In Moscow, he encountered other revolutionaries, learnt of Lenin, and read Lenin's \"The Development of Capitalism in Russia\". Two months into his imprisonment, the first Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) was held (1\u20133 March 1898). From then on, Trotsky identified as an RSDLP member.\nFirst marriage and Siberian exile (1899\u20131902).\nWhile imprisoned in Moscow in the summer of 1900, Trotsky married his fellow-Marxist Aleksandra Sokolovskaya (1872\u20131938) in a ceremony performed by a Jewish chaplain. In 1900 Trotsky was sentenced to four years of exile in Siberia. Due to their marriage, Trotsky and his wife were exiled together to Ust-Kut and Verkholensk in the Baikal region. They had two daughters, Zinaida (1901\u20131933) and Nina (1902\u20131928), both born in Siberia.\nIn Siberia, Trotsky studied history, philosophy, economics, sociology, and the works of Karl Marx to solidify his political stance. He became aware of internal party differences, particularly the debate between \"economists\", who focused on workers' economic improvements, and those who prioritised overthrowing the monarchy through a disciplined revolutionary party. The latter position was advocated by the London-based newspaper \"Iskra\" (\"The Spark\"), founded in 1900. Trotsky quickly sided with \"Iskra\" and began writing for it.\nIn the summer of 1902, urged by his wife, Trotsky escaped from Siberia hidden in a load of hay. Aleksandra later escaped with their daughters. Both daughters married and had children but died before their parents. Nina Nevelson died of tuberculosis in 1928. Zinaida Volkova, also suffering from tuberculosis and depression, followed her father into exile but committed suicide in Berlin in 1933. Aleksandra disappeared in 1935 during Stalin's Great Purge and was murdered by Soviet forces in 1938.\nFirst emigration and second marriage (1902\u20131903).\nUntil this point, Trotsky had used his birth name, Lev (Leon) Bronstein. He adopted the surname \"Trotsky\"\u2014reportedly the name of a jailer in the Odessa prison where he had been held\u2014which he used for the rest of his life. This became his primary revolutionary pseudonym. After escaping Siberia, Trotsky moved to London, joining Georgi Plekhanov, Lenin, Julius Martov and other editors of \"Iskra\". Writing under the pen name \"Pero\" (\"quill\" or \"pen\"), Trotsky soon became one of the paper's leading writers.\nThe six editors of \"Iskra\" were split between an \"old guard\" led by Plekhanov and a \"new guard\" led by Lenin and Martov. Lenin, seeking a majority against Plekhanov, expected the 23-year-old Trotsky to side with the new guard. In March 1903 Lenin proposed Trotsky's co-option to the editorial board:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I suggest to all the members of the editorial board that they co-opt 'Pero' as a member of the board on the same basis as other members. [...] We very much need a seventh member, both as a convenience in voting (six being an even number) and as an addition to our forces. 'Pero' has been contributing to every issue for several months now; he works, in general, most energetically for the Iskra; he gives lectures (in which he has been very successful). In the section of articles and notes on the events of the day, he will not only be very useful, but absolutely necessary. Unquestionably a man of rare abilities, he has conviction and energy, and he will go much farther.\nDue to Plekhanov's opposition, Trotsky did not become a full board member but participated in an advisory capacity, earning Plekhanov's animosity.\nIn late 1902 Trotsky met Natalia Sedova (1882\u20131962), who soon became his companion. They married in 1903 and remained together until his death. They had two sons, Lev Sedov (1906\u20131938) and Sergei Sedov (1908\u20131937), both of whom predeceased their parents. Trotsky later explained that, for \"citizenship\" requirements after the 1917 revolution, he \"took on the name of my wife\" so his sons would not have to change their name. However, he never publicly or privately used the name \"Sedov\". Natalia Sedova sometimes signed her name \"Sedova-Trotskaya\".\nSplit with Lenin (1903\u20131904).\nIn August 1903 \"Iskra\" convened the RSDLP's Second Congress in London. Trotsky attended with other \"Iskra\" editors. After defeating the \"economist\" delegates, the congress addressed the Bund's desire for autonomy within the party.\nSubsequently, the pro-\"Iskra\" delegates unexpectedly split. The initial dispute was organisational: Lenin and his supporters (the Bolsheviks) advocated for a smaller, highly organised party of committed members, while Martov and his supporters (the Mensheviks) favoured a larger, less disciplined party that included sympathisers. Trotsky and most \"Iskra\" editors supported Martov, while Plekhanov backed Lenin. During 1903\u20131904, allegiances shifted; Trotsky left the Mensheviks in September 1904, disagreeing with their insistence on an alliance with Russian liberals and their opposition to reconciliation with Lenin and the Bolsheviks.\nFrom 1904 to 1917 Trotsky described himself as a \"non-factional social democrat\". He attempted to reconcile party factions, leading to clashes with Lenin and others. Trotsky later admitted he was wrong to oppose Lenin on party organisation. During this period, he developed his theory of permanent revolution and worked closely with Alexander Parvus (1904\u20131907). During their split Lenin referred to Trotsky as \"Judas\" (\"Iudushka\", after a character in Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin's novel \"The Golovlyov Family\"), a \"scoundrel\", and a \"swine\".\n1905 revolution and trial (1905\u20131906).\nAnti-government unrest culminated in Saint Petersburg on 3 January 1905 (O.S.), when a strike began at the Putilov Works. This escalated into a general strike, with 140,000 strikers in Saint Petersburg by 7 January 1905.\nOn Sunday, 9 January 1905 Father Georgi Gapon led a procession to the Winter Palace, ostensibly to petition Tsar Nicholas II. Accounts differ, but the Palace Guard fired on the demonstration, resulting in numerous deaths and injuries. This event, known as Bloody Sunday, intensified revolutionary fervour. Gapon's own biography suggests a degree of provocation by radicals within the crowd, a claim later echoed by some police records.\nFollowing Bloody Sunday, Trotsky secretly returned to Russia in February 1905 via Kiev. He wrote for an underground press in Kiev before moving to Saint Petersburg. There he worked with Bolsheviks like Leonid Krasin and the local Menshevik committee, pushing the latter in a more radical direction. A police raid in May forced him to flee to rural Finland, where he further developed his theory of permanent revolution.\nOn 19 September 1905, typesetters at Ivan Sytin's Moscow printing house struck for shorter hours and higher pay. By 24 September, 50 other Moscow printing shops joined. On 2 October, Saint Petersburg typesetters struck in solidarity. On 7 October railway workers of the Moscow\u2013Kazan Railway also struck. Amidst this turmoil, Trotsky returned to Saint Petersburg on 15 October. He addressed the Saint Petersburg Soviet (Council) of Workers' Deputies at the Technological Institute, with an estimated 200,000 people gathered outside\u2014about half the city's workers.\nAfter his return, Trotsky and Parvus took over the newspaper \"Russian Gazette\", increasing its circulation to 500,000. Trotsky also co-founded \"Nachalo\" (\"The Beginning\") with Parvus, Julius Martov, and other Mensheviks, which became a successful newspaper during the 1905 revolutionary climate in Saint Petersburg.\nBefore Trotsky's return, Mensheviks had independently conceived of an elected, non-party revolutionary body representing the capital's workers: the first Soviet. By Trotsky's arrival, the Saint Petersburg Soviet was functioning, headed by Khrustalyev-Nosar (Georgy Nosar, alias Pyotr Khrustalyov), a lawyer chosen as a compromise figure. Khrustalyev-Nosar became popular and was the Soviet's public face. Trotsky joined the Soviet as \"Yanovsky\" (after his birthplace) and was elected vice-chairman. He performed much of the practical work and, after Khrustalyev-Nosar's arrest on 26 November 1905, became its chairman. On 2 December, the Soviet issued a proclamation on Tsarist government debts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The autocracy never enjoyed the confidence of the people and was never granted any authority by the people. We have therefore decided not to allow the repayment of such loans as have been made by the Tsarist government when openly engaged in a war with the entire people.\nThe following day, 3 December 1905, government troops surrounded the Soviet, and its deputies were arrested. Trotsky and other leaders were tried in 1906 for supporting an armed rebellion. On 4 October 1906 he was convicted and sentenced to internal exile in Siberia.\nSecond emigration (1907\u20131914).\nEn route to exile in Obdorsk, Siberia, in January 1907, Trotsky escaped at Berezov and made his way to London. He attended the 5th Congress of the RSDLP. In October he moved to Vienna in Austria-Hungary. For the next seven years, he participated in the activities of the Austrian Social Democratic Party and occasionally the German Social Democratic Party. In Vienna he became close to Adolph Joffe, his friend for the next 20 years, who introduced him to psychoanalysis.\nIn October 1908 Trotsky joined the editorial staff of \"Pravda\" (\"Truth\"), a bi-weekly, Russian-language social democratic paper for Russian workers, co-editing it with Joffe and Matvey Skobelev. It was smuggled into Russia. The paper appeared irregularly, with only five issues in its first year. Avoiding factional politics, it proved popular with Russian industrial workers. After the 1905\u20131907 revolution's failure, both Bolsheviks and Mensheviks experienced multiple splits. Funding for \"Pravda\" was scarce. Trotsky sought financial backing from the RSDLP Central Committee throughout 1909.\nIn 1910 a Bolshevik majority controlled the Central Committee. Lenin agreed to finance \"Pravda\" but required a Bolshevik co-editor. When various factions tried to reunite at the January 1910 RSDLP Central Committee meeting in Paris (over Lenin's objections), Trotsky's \"Pravda\" was made a party-financed 'central organ'. Lev Kamenev, Trotsky's brother-in-law, joined the editorial board from the Bolsheviks. However, unification attempts failed by August 1910. Kamenev resigned amid mutual recriminations. Trotsky continued publishing \"Pravda\" for another two years until it folded in April 1912.\nThe Bolsheviks launched a new workers' newspaper in Saint Petersburg on 22 April 1912, also named \"Pravda\". Trotsky, upset by what he saw as the usurpation of his newspaper's name, wrote a bitter letter to Nikolay Chkheidze, a Menshevik leader, in April 1913, denouncing Lenin and the Bolsheviks. Though he quickly moved past the disagreement, the letter was intercepted by the Okhrana (secret police) and archived. After Lenin's death in 1924, Trotsky's opponents within the Communist Party publicised the letter to portray him as Lenin's enemy.\nThe 1910s were a period of heightened tension within the RSDLP. A major disagreement between Trotsky and the Mensheviks on one side, and Lenin on the other, concerned \"expropriations\"\u2014armed robberies of banks and businesses by Bolshevik groups to fund the Party. These actions, banned by the 5th Congress, were continued by Bolsheviks.\nIn January 1912 most of the Bolshevik faction, led by Lenin, held a conference in Prague, broke away from the RSDLP, and formed the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks). In response, Trotsky organised a \"unification\" conference of social democratic factions in Vienna in August 1912 (the \"August Bloc\") to reunite Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, but this attempt was largely unsuccessful.\nIn Vienna, Trotsky published articles in radical Russian and Ukrainian newspapers like \"Kievskaya Mysl\", using pseudonyms such as \"Antid Oto\", a name chosen randomly from an Italian dictionary. Trotsky joked he \"wanted to inject the Marxist antidote into the legitimate newspapers\". In September 1912 \"Kievskaya Mysl\" sent him to the Balkans as its war correspondent, where he covered the two Balkan Wars for the next year. There, Trotsky chronicled ethnic cleansing carried out by the Serbian army against Albanian civilians. He became a close friend of Christian Rakovsky, later a leading Soviet politician and Trotsky's ally. On 3 August 1914, at the outbreak of World War I, with Austria-Hungary fighting the Russian Empire, Trotsky was forced to flee Vienna for neutral Switzerland to avoid arrest as a Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9.\nWorld War I (1914\u20131917).\nWorld War I caused a sudden realignment within the RSDLP and other European social democratic parties over issues of war, revolution, pacifism, and internationalism. The RSDLP split into \"defeatists\" and \"defencists\". Lenin, Trotsky, and Martov advocated various internationalist anti-war positions, viewing defeat for their own country's ruling class as a \"lesser evil\" and opposing all imperialists in the war. \"Defencists\" like Plekhanov supported the Russian government to some extent. Trotsky's former colleague Parvus, now a defencist, sided so strongly against Russia that he wished for a German victory. In Switzerland, Trotsky briefly worked with the Swiss Socialist Party, prompting it to adopt an internationalist resolution. He wrote \"The War and the International\", opposing the war and the pro-war stance of European social democratic parties, especially the German party.\nAs a war correspondent for \"Kievskaya Mysl\", Trotsky moved to France on 19 November 1914. In January 1915 in Paris he began editing \"Nashe Slovo\" (\"Our Word\"), an internationalist socialist newspaper, initially with Martov (who soon resigned as the paper moved left). He adopted the slogan \"peace without indemnities or annexations, peace without conquerors or conquered\". Lenin advocated Russia's defeat and demanded a complete break with the Second International.\nTrotsky attended the Zimmerwald Conference of anti-war socialists in September 1915, advocating a middle course between those like Martov, who would stay in the Second International, and those like Lenin, who would break from it and form a Third International. The conference adopted Trotsky's proposed middle line. Lenin, initially opposed, eventually voted for Trotsky's resolution to avoid a split among anti-war socialists.\nIn September 1916 Trotsky was deported from France to Spain for his anti-war activities. Spanish authorities, not wanting him, deported him to the United States on 25 December 1916. He arrived in New York City on 13 January 1917, staying for over two months at 1522 Vyse Avenue in the Bronx. In New York he wrote articles for the local Russian-language socialist newspaper \"Novy Mir\" and, in translation, for the Yiddish-language daily \"Der Forverts\" (\"Forward\"). He also gave speeches to Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9s.\nTrotsky was in New York City when the February Revolution of 1917 led to the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II. He left New York aboard SS \"Kristianiafjord\" on 27 March 1917, but his ship was intercepted by the Royal Navy at Halifax, Nova Scotia. Trotsky was arrested and detained for a month at the Amherst Internment Camp in Nova Scotia. In the camp, he befriended workers and sailors among his fellow inmates, describing his month there as \"one continual mass meeting\". His speeches and agitation angered German inmates, who complained to the camp commander, Colonel Morris, about Trotsky's \"anti-patriotic\" attitude. Morris subsequently forbade Trotsky from making public speeches, leading to 530 prisoners protesting and signing a petition against the decision. In Russia, after initial hesitation and under pressure from workers' and peasants' Soviets, Foreign Minister Pavel Milyukov demanded Trotsky's release as a Russian citizen. The British government freed him on 29 April 1917.\nHe reached Russia on 17 May 1917. Upon his return, Trotsky largely agreed with the Bolshevik position but did not immediately join them. Russian social democrats were split into at least six groups, and the Bolsheviks awaited the next party Congress to decide on mergers. Trotsky temporarily joined the Mezhraiontsy, a regional social democratic organisation in Petrograd, becoming one of its leaders. At the First Congress of Soviets in June, he was elected a member of the first All-Russian Central Executive Committee (VTsIK) from the Mezhraiontsy faction.\nAfter an unsuccessful pro-Bolshevik uprising in Petrograd in July (the July Days), Trotsky was arrested on 7 August 1917. He was released 40 days later following the failed counter-revolutionary uprising by Lavr Kornilov. After the Bolsheviks gained a majority in the Petrograd Soviet, Trotsky was elected its chairman on 8 October\u00a0[O.S. 25 September]\u00a01917. He sided with Lenin against Grigory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev when the Bolshevik Central Committee discussed staging an armed uprising, and he led the efforts to overthrow the Russian Provisional Government headed by the socialist Alexander Kerensky.\nJoseph Stalin wrote the following summary of Trotsky's role in 1917 in \"Pravda\" on 6 November 1918:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All practical work in connection with the organization of the uprising was done under the immediate direction of Comrade Trotsky, the President of the Petrograd Soviet. It can be stated with certainty that the Party is indebted primarily and principally to Comrade Trotsky for the rapid going over of the garrison to the side of the Soviet and the efficient manner in which the work of the Military Revolutionary Committee was organized.\nAlthough this passage was quoted in Stalin's book \"The October Revolution\" (1934), it was expunged from Stalin's \"Works\" (1949).\nAfter the success of the October Revolution on 7\u20138 November 1917, Trotsky led efforts to repel a counter-attack by Cossacks under General Pyotr Krasnov and other troops loyal to the overthrown Provisional Government at Gatchina. Allied with Lenin, he defeated attempts by other Bolshevik Central Committee members (Zinoviev, Kamenev, Rykov, etc.) to share power with other moderate socialist parties. Trotsky advocated for a predominantly Bolshevik government and was reluctant to recall Mensheviks as partners after their voluntary withdrawal from the Congress of Soviets. However, he released several socialist ministers from prison. Neither Trotsky nor his colleagues in 1917 initially wished to suppress these parties entirely; the Bolsheviks reserved vacant seats in the Soviets and the Central Executive Committee for these parties in proportion to their vote share at the Congress. Concurrently, prominent Left Socialist Revolutionaries assumed positions in Lenin's government, leading commissariats such as agriculture (Andrei Kolegayev), property (Vladimir Karelin), justice (Isaac Steinberg), posts and telegraphs (Prosh Proshian), and local government (Vladimir Trutovsky). According to Deutscher, Menshevik and Social Revolutionary demands for a coalition government included disarming Bolshevik detachments and excluding Lenin and Trotsky, which was unacceptable even to moderate Bolshevik negotiators like Kamenev and Sokolnikov. By the end of 1917 Trotsky was unquestionably the second-most-powerful man in the Bolshevik Party after Lenin, overshadowing Zinoviev, who had been Lenin's top lieutenant for the previous decade.\nRussian Revolution and aftermath.\nCommissar for Foreign Affairs and Brest-Litovsk (1917\u20131918).\nAfter the Bolsheviks seized power, Trotsky became People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs. He published the secret treaties previously signed by the Triple Entente, which detailed plans for post-war reallocation of colonies and redrawing state borders, including the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement. This revelation on 23 November 1917 caused considerable embarrassment to Britain and France.\nBrest-Litovsk.\nIn preparation for peace talks with the Central Powers, Trotsky appointed his old friend Adolph Joffe to represent the Bolsheviks. When the Soviet delegation learned that Germany and Austria-Hungary planned to annex Polish territory, establish a rump Polish state, and turn the Baltic provinces into client states ruled by German princes, the talks were recessed for 12 days. The Soviets hoped that, given time, their allies would join the negotiations or that the Western European proletariat would revolt; thus, prolonging negotiations was their best strategy. As Trotsky wrote, \"To delay negotiations, there must be someone to do the delaying\". Consequently, Trotsky replaced Joffe as head of the Soviet delegation at Brest-Litovsk from 22 December 1917 to 10 February 1918.\nThe Soviet government was divided. Left Communists, led by Nikolai Bukharin, believed no peace was possible between a Soviet republic and a capitalist empire, advocating a revolutionary war for a pan-European Soviet republic. They cited early Red Army successes against Polish forces, White forces, and Ukrainian forces as proof of its capability, especially with propaganda and asymmetrical warfare. They were willing to negotiate to expose German imperial ambitions but opposed signing any peace treaty, favouring a revolutionary war if faced with a German ultimatum. This view was shared by the Left Socialist Revolutionaries, then junior partners in the coalition government.\nLenin, initially hopeful for a swift European revolution, concluded that the German Imperial government remained strong and that, without a robust Russian military, armed conflict would lead to the Soviet government's collapse. He agreed a pan-European revolution was the ultimate solution but prioritised Bolshevik survival. From January 1918, he advocated signing a separate peace treaty if faced with a German ultimatum. Trotsky's position was between these factions. He acknowledged the old Russian army's inability to fight:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That we could no longer fight was perfectly clear to me and that the newly formed Red Guard and Red Army detachments were too small and poorly trained to resist the Germans.\nHowever, he agreed with the Left Communists that a separate peace treaty would be a severe morale and material blow, negating recent successes, reviving suspicions of Bolshevik-German collusion, and fuelling internal resistance. He argued that a German ultimatum should be refused, which might trigger an uprising in Germany or inspire German soldiers to disobey orders if an offensive was a naked land grab. Trotsky wrote in 1925:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We began peace negotiations in the hope of arousing the workmen's party of Germany and Austria-Hungary as well as of the Entente countries. For this reason we were obliged to delay the negotiations as long as possible to give the European workman time to understand the main fact of the Soviet revolution itself and particularly its peace policy. But there was the other question: Can the Germans still fight? Are they in a position to begin an attack on the revolution that will explain the cessation of the war? How can we find out the state of mind of the German soldiers, how to fathom it?\nIn a letter to Lenin before 18 January 1918, Trotsky outlined his \"no war, no peace\" policy: announce war termination and demobilisation without signing a treaty, placing the fate of Poland, Lithuania, and Courland on the German working people. He believed Germany would find it difficult to attack due to internal conditions and opposition from various German political factions. Lenin initially responded on 18 January: \"Stalin has just arrived; we will look into the matter with him and let you have a joint answer right away\" and \"please adjourn proceedings and leave for Petrograd. Send a reply; I will wait. Lenin, Stalin\". Trotsky, sensing disagreement, returned to Petrograd. During their debate, Lenin concluded: \"In any case, I stand for the immediate signing of peace; it is safer.\"\nOn 10 February 1918 Trotsky and the Russian delegation withdrew from peace talks, declaring an end to the war on Russia's side without signing a peace treaty. Privately, Trotsky had expressed willingness to relent to peace terms if Germany resumed its offensive, albeit with moral dissent. Germany resumed military operations on 18 February. The Red Army detachments proved no match for the German army. On the evening of 18 February, Trotsky and his supporters abstained in a Central Committee vote, and Lenin's proposal to accept German terms was approved 7\u20134. The Soviet government sent a radiogram accepting the final Brest-Litovsk terms.\nGermany did not respond for three days, continuing its offensive. The response on 21 February contained such harsh terms that even Lenin briefly considered fighting. However, the Central Committee again voted 7\u20134 on 23 February to accept. The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed on 3 March and ratified on 15 March 1918. Closely associated with the previous \"no war, no peace\" policy, Trotsky resigned as Commissar for Foreign Affairs.\nHead of the Red Army (spring 1918).\nOn 13 March 1918, Trotsky's resignation as Foreign Affairs Commissar was accepted. He was appointed People's Commissar of Army and Navy Affairs, replacing Podvoisky, and chairman of the Supreme Military Council. The post of commander-in-chief was abolished, giving Trotsky full control of the Red Army, responsible only to the Communist Party leadership, whose Left Socialist Revolutionary allies had left the government over the treaty. The entire Bolshevik Red Army leadership, including the former Defence Commissar Nikolai Podvoisky and commander-in-chief Nikolai Krylenko, vigorously protested against Trotsky's appointment and eventually resigned. They believed the Red Army should consist only of dedicated revolutionaries, rely on propaganda and force, and have elected officers. They viewed former imperial officers as potential traitors. Their views remained popular, and their supporters, including Podvoisky (who became one of Trotsky's deputies), were a constant source of opposition. Discontent with Trotsky's policies of strict discipline, conscription, and reliance on supervised non-Communist military experts led to the Military Opposition, active within the Party in late 1918\u20131919.\nCivil War (1918\u20131920).\n1918.\nThe military situation tested Trotsky's organisational skills. In May\u2013June 1918, the Czechoslovak Legions revolted, leading to the loss of most of Russia's territory, increasingly organised resistance from anti-Communist forces (the White Army), and widespread defections by military experts Trotsky relied on.\nTrotsky and the government responded with a full mobilisation, increasing the Red Army from under 300,000 in May 1918 to one million by October, and introducing political commissars to ensure loyalty of military experts (mostly former Imperial officers) and co-sign their orders. Trotsky viewed the Red Army's organisation as built on October Revolution ideals. He later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An army cannot be built without reprisals. Masses of men cannot be led to death unless the army command has the death-penalty in its arsenal. So long as those malicious tailless apes that are so proud of their technical achievements\u2014the animals that we call men\u2014will build armies and wage wars, the command will always be obliged to place the soldiers between the possible death in the front and the inevitable one in the rear. And yet armies are not built on fear. The Tsar's army fell to pieces not because of any lack of reprisals. In his attempt to save it by restoring the death-penalty, Kerensky only finished it. Upon the ashes of the great war, the Bolsheviks created a new army. These facts demand no explanation for any one who has even the slightest knowledge of the language of history. The strongest cement in the new army was the ideas of the October revolution, and the train supplied the front with this cement.\nA controversial measure was hostage-taking of relatives of ex-Tsarist officials in the Red Army to prevent defection or betrayal. Service noted this practice was used by both Red and White armies. Trotsky later defended this, arguing no families of betraying ex-officials were executed and that such draconian measures, if adopted earlier, would have reduced overall casualties. Deutscher highlights Trotsky's preference for exchanging hostages over execution, recounting General Pyotr Krasnov's release on parole in 1918, only for Krasnov to take up arms again shortly thereafter.\nRed Terror.\nThe Red Terror was enacted following assassination attempts on Lenin and Trotsky, and the assassinations of Petrograd Cheka leader Moisei Uritsky and the party editor V. Volodarsky. The French Reign of Terror is seen as an influence. The decision was also driven by early White Army massacres of \"Red\" prisoners in 1917, Allied intervention, and massacres of Reds during the Finnish Civil War (10,000\u201320,000 workers killed by Finnish Whites). In \"Terrorism and Communism\", Trotsky argued the terror in Russia began with the White Terror under White Guard forces, to which the Bolsheviks responded with the Red Terror.\nFelix Dzerzhinsky, director of the Cheka (predecessor to the KGB), was tasked with rooting out counter-revolutionary threats. From early 1918, Bolsheviks began eliminating opposition, including anarchists. On 11 August 1918 Lenin telegraphed orders \"to introduce mass terror\" in Nizhny Novgorod and to \"crush\" landowners resisting grain requisitioning.\nOn 30 August Fanny Kaplan, a Socialist Revolutionary, unsuccessfully attempted to assassinate Lenin. In September Trotsky rushed from the eastern front to Moscow; Stalin remained in Tsaritsyn. Kaplan cited growing Bolshevik authoritarianism. These events persuaded the government to heed Dzerzhinsky's calls for greater terror. The Red Terror officially began thereafter, between 17 and 30 August 1918. Trotsky wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The bourgeoisie today is a falling class... We are forced to tear it off, to chop it away. The Red Terror is a weapon utilized against a class, doomed to destruction, which does not wish to perish. If the White Terror can only retard the historical rise of the proletariat, the Red Terror hastens the destruction of the bourgeoisie.\nDesertions.\nTrotsky appealed politically to deserters, arousing them with revolutionary ideas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In...Kaluga, Voronezh, and Ryazan, tens of thousands of young peasants had failed to answer the first recruiting summons by the Soviets ... The war commissariat of Ryazan succeeded in gathering in some fifteen thousand of such deserters. While passing through Ryazan, I decided to take a look at them... The men were called out of their barracks. \"Comrade-deserters\u2014come to the meeting. Comrade Trotsky has come to speak to you.\" They ran out excited, boisterous, as curious as schoolboys... I spoke to them for about an hour and a half... I tried to raise them in their own eyes; concluding, I asked them to lift their hands in token of their loyalty to the revolution... They were genuinely enthusiastic... Later on, regiments of Ryazan \"deserters\" fought well at the fronts.\nThe Red Army first used punitive barrier troops in summer/autumn 1918 on the Eastern Front. Trotsky authorised Mikhail Tukhachevsky, commander of the 1st Army, to station blocking detachments behind unreliable infantry regiments, with orders to shoot if front-line troops deserted or retreated without permission. These troops comprised personnel from Cheka punitive detachments or regular infantry regiments. In December 1918 Trotsky ordered more barrier troops raised for each infantry formation. Barrier troops were also used to enforce Bolshevik control over food supplies, earning civilian hatred.\nGiven manpower shortages and 16 opposing foreign armies, Trotsky insisted on using former Tsarist officers as military specialists, combined with Bolshevik political commissars. Lenin commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When Comrade Trotsky informed me recently that the number of officers of the old army employed by our War Department runs into several tens of thousands, I perceived concretely where the secret of using our enemy lay, how to compel those who had opposed communism to build it, how to build communism with the bricks which the capitalists had chosen to hurl against us! We have no other bricks! And so, we must compel the bourgeois experts, under the leadership of the proletariat, to build up our edifice with these bricks. This is what is difficult; but this is the pledge of victory.\nIn September 1918, facing military difficulties, the Bolshevik government declared martial law and reorganised the Red Army. The Supreme Military Council was abolished, and the position of commander-in-chief restored, filled by Jukums V\u0101cietis, commander of the Latvian Riflemen. V\u0101cietis handled day-to-day operations. Trotsky became chairman of the new Revolutionary Military Council of the Republic, retaining overall military control. Despite earlier clashes with V\u0101cietis, Trotsky established a working relationship. This reorganisation caused another conflict between Trotsky and Stalin in late September. Trotsky appointed the former imperial general Pavel Sytin to command the Southern Front, but Stalin refused to accept him in early October, and Sytin was recalled. Lenin and Yakov Sverdlov tried to reconcile Trotsky and Stalin, but their meeting failed.\nIn 1919, 612 \"hardcore\" deserters out of 837,000 draft dodgers and deserters were executed under Trotsky's draconian measures. According to Orlando Figes, most \"deserters...were handed back to the military authorities, and formed into units for transfer to one of the rear armies or directly to the front\". Even \"malicious\" deserters were returned to the ranks when reinforcements were desperate. Figes noted the Red Army instituted amnesty weeks, prohibiting punitive measures against desertion, which encouraged the voluntary return of 98,000\u2013132,000 deserters.\n1919.\nThroughout late 1918 and early 1919, Trotsky's leadership faced attacks, including veiled accusations in Stalin-inspired newspaper articles and a direct attack by the Military Opposition at the VIIIth Party Congress in March 1919. He weathered them, being elected one of five full members of the first Politburo after the Congress. But he later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is no wonder that my military work created so many enemies for me. I did not look to the side, I elbowed away those who interfered with military success, or in the haste of the work trod on the toes of the unheeding and was too busy even to apologize. Some people remember such things. The dissatisfied and those whose feelings had been hurt found their way to Stalin or Zinoviev, for these two also nourished hurts.\nIn mid-1919 the Red Army had grown from 800,000 to 3,000,000 and fought on sixteen fronts, providing an opportunity for challenges to Trotsky's leadership. At the 3\u20134 July Central Committee meeting, after a heated exchange, the majority supported Kamenev and Smilga against V\u0101cietis and Trotsky. Trotsky's plan was rejected, and he was criticised for alleged leadership shortcomings, many personal. Stalin used this to pressure Lenin to dismiss Trotsky.\nSignificant changes were made to Red Army leadership. Trotsky was temporarily sent to the Southern Front, while Smilga informally coordinated work in Moscow. Most non-day-to-day Revolutionary Military Council members were relieved of duties on 8 July, and new members, including Smilga, were added. The same day, V\u0101cietis was arrested by the Cheka on suspicion of an anti-Soviet plot and replaced by Sergey Kamenev. After weeks in the south, Trotsky returned to Moscow and resumed control. A year later, Smilga and Tukhachevsky were defeated at the Battle of Warsaw, but Trotsky's refusal to retaliate against Smilga earned his friendship and later support during 1920s intra-Party battles.\nBy October 1919 the government faced its worst crisis: Denikin's troops approached Tula and Moscow from the south, and General Nikolay Yudenich's troops approached Petrograd from the west. Lenin decided Petrograd had to be abandoned to defend Moscow. Trotsky argued Petrograd needed to be defended, partly to prevent Estonia and Finland from intervening. In a rare reversal, Trotsky, supported by Stalin and Zinoviev, prevailed against Lenin in the Central Committee.\n1920.\nWith Denikin and Yudenich defeated in late 1919, government emphasis shifted to the economy. Trotsky spent winter 1919\u20131920 in the Urals region restarting its economy. A false rumour of his assassination circulated internationally on New Year's Day 1920. Based on his experiences, he proposed abandoning War Communism policies, including grain confiscation, and partially restoring the grain market. Lenin, still committed to War Communism, rejected his proposal.\nIn early 1920, Soviet\u2013Polish tensions led to the Polish\u2013Soviet War. Trotsky argued the Red Army was exhausted and the government should sign a peace treaty with Poland quickly, not believing the Red Army would find much support in Poland. Lenin and other Bolshevik leaders believed Red Army successes meant \"The defensive period of the war with worldwide imperialism was over, and we could, and had the obligation to, exploit the military situation to launch an offensive war.\" Poland defeated the Red Army, turning back the offensive at the Battle of Warsaw in August 1920. Back in Moscow, Trotsky again argued for peace, and this time prevailed.\nTrade union debate (1920\u20131921).\nDuring the 1920\u20131921 trade union debate, Trotsky argued that trade unions should be integrated directly into the state apparatus, advocating for a \"militarization of labour\" to rebuild the Soviet economy. He believed that in a workers' state, the state should control unions, with workers treated as \"soldiers of labour\" under strict discipline.\nThis position was sharply criticised by Lenin, who argued unions should retain some independence and act as \"schools of communism\" rather than state instruments. Lenin's view prevailed at the 10th Congress in 1921. Several of Trotsky's supporters, including Nikolay Krestinsky, lost leadership positions.\nKronstadt rebellion.\nIn March 1921, during the Kronstadt Rebellion, sailors and soldiers at the Kronstadt naval base revolted against the Bolshevik government, demanding greater freedom for workers and peasants, an end to one-party rule, and restoration of civil rights. The rebellion, occurring simultaneously with the 10th Party Congress, further destabilised the fragile political situation.\nTrotsky, as Commissar of War, was instrumental in ordering the rebellion's suppression. On 18 March 1921, after failed negotiations, the Red Army stormed the island, resulting in thousands of Kronstadt sailors' deaths. Trotsky justified the action by presenting evidence of foreign backing, a claim contested by several historians. His role has been criticised, with anarchists like Emma Goldman accusing him of betraying the revolution's democratic ideals.\nContribution to the Russian Revolution.\nThe historian Vladimir Cherniaev sums up Trotsky's main contributions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe historian Geoffrey Swain argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Bolsheviks triumphed in the Civil War because of Trotsky's ability to work with military specialists, because of the style of work he introduced where widescale consultation was followed through by swift and determined action.\nLenin said in 1921 that Trotsky was \"in love with organisation\", but in working politics, \"he has not got a clue\". Swain explains this by arguing Trotsky was not good at teamwork, being a loner who had mostly worked as a journalist, not a professional revolutionary like others.\nLenin's illness (1922\u20131923).\nIn late 1921 Lenin's health deteriorated. He suffered three strokes between 25 May 1922 and 9 March 1923, causing paralysis, loss of speech, and his eventual death on 21 January 1924. With Lenin increasingly sidelined, Stalin was elevated to the new position of Central Committee General Secretary in April 1922. Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev formed a triumvirate (\"troika\") with Stalin to prevent Trotsky, publicly number two and Lenin's heir presumptive, from succeeding Lenin.\nThe rest of the expanded Politburo (Rykov, Mikhail Tomsky, Bukharin) initially remained uncommitted but eventually joined the \"troika\". Stalin's patronage power as General Secretary played a role, but Trotsky and his supporters later concluded a more fundamental reason was the slow bureaucratisation of the Soviet regime after the Civil War. Much of the Bolshevik elite desired \"normality\", while Trotsky personified a turbulent revolutionary period they wished to leave behind.\nEvidence suggests the \"troika\" initially nominated Trotsky for minor government departments (e.g., Gokhran, the State Depository for Valuables). In mid-July 1922 Kamenev wrote to the recovering Lenin that \"[the Central Committee] is throwing or is ready to throw a good cannon overboard\". Lenin, shocked, responded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Throwing Trotsky overboard\u2014surely you are hinting at that, it is impossible to interpret it otherwise\u2014is the height of stupidity. If you do not consider me already hopelessly foolish, how can you think of that????\nUntil his final stroke, Lenin tried to prevent a split in the leadership, reflected in \"Lenin's Testament\". On 11 September 1922 Lenin proposed Trotsky should become his deputy at the Council of People's Commissars (Sovnarkom). The Politburo approved, but Trotsky \"categorically refused\". This proposal is interpreted by some scholars as Lenin designating Trotsky his successor as head of government.\nIn late 1922 Trotsky allied with Lenin against Stalin and the emerging Soviet bureaucracy. Stalin had recently engineered the creation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), further centralising state control. The alliance was effective on foreign trade but was hindered by Lenin's progressing illness.\nIn January 1923 Lenin amended his Testament to suggest Stalin's removal as General Secretary, while also mildly criticising Trotsky and other Bolsheviks. The Stalin\u2013Lenin relationship had completely broken down, demonstrated when Stalin crudely insulted Lenin's wife, Nadezhda Krupskaya. In March 1923, days before his third stroke, Lenin asked Trotsky to denounce Stalin and his \"Great-Russian nationalistic campaign\" at the XIIth Party Congress.\nAt the XIIth Party Congress in April 1923, after Lenin's final stroke, Trotsky did not raise the issue. Instead, he spoke about intra-party democracy, avoiding direct confrontation with the \"troika\". Stalin had prepared by replacing many local delegates with his loyalists, mostly at the expense of Zinoviev and Kamenev's backers. Delegates, mostly unaware of Politburo divisions, gave Trotsky a standing ovation. This upset the \"troika\", already infuriated by Karl Radek's article \"Leon Trotsky \u2013 Organiser of Victory\", published in \"Pravda\" on 14 March 1923. Stalin delivered key reports on organisational structure and nationalities; Zinoviev delivered the Central Committee political report, traditionally Lenin's prerogative. Resolutions calling for greater party democracy were adopted but remained vague and unimplemented.\nThe power struggle also impacted prospects for world revolution. The German Communist Party leadership requested Trotsky be sent to Germany to direct the 1923 insurrection. The Politburo, controlled by Stalin, Zinoviev, and Kamenev, rejected this, sending a commission of lower-ranking Russian Communist party members instead.\nLeft Opposition (1923\u20131924).\nFrom mid-1923 the Soviet economy faced significant difficulties, leading to widespread strikes. Two secret groups within the Communist Party, \"Workers' Truth\" and \"Workers' Group\", were suppressed by the secret police. On 8 October 1923, Trotsky wrote to the Central Committee and Central Control Commission, attributing these problems to a lack of intra-Party democracy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the fiercest moment of War Communism, the system of appointment within the party did not have one tenth of the extent that it has now. Appointment of the secretaries of provincial committees is now the rule. That creates for the secretary a position essentially independent of the local organization. [...] The bureaucratization of the party apparatus has developed to unheard-of proportions by means of the method of secretarial selection. [...] There has been created a very broad stratum of party workers, entering into the apparatus of the government of the party, who completely renounce their own party opinion, at least the open expression of it, as though assuming that the secretarial hierarchy is the apparatus which creates party opinion and party decisions. Beneath this stratum, abstaining from their own opinions, there lies the broad mass of the party, before whom every decision stands in the form of a summons or a command.\nOther senior communists with similar concerns sent \"The Declaration of 46\" to the Central Committee on 15 October, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] we observe an ever progressing, barely disguised division of the party into a secretarial hierarchy and into \"laymen\", into professional party functionaries, chosen from above, and the other party masses, who take no part in social life. [...] free discussion within the party has virtually disappeared, party public opinion has been stifled. [...] it is the secretarial hierarchy, the party hierarchy which to an ever greater degree chooses the delegates to the conferences and congresses, which to an ever greater degree are becoming the executive conferences of this hierarchy.\nThough secret at the time, these letters significantly impacted the Party leadership, prompting a partial retreat by the \"troika\" and its supporters, notably in Zinoviev's \"Pravda\" article of 7 November. Throughout November, the \"troika\" sought a compromise to placate Trotsky and his supporters (made easier by Trotsky's illness in November\u2013December). Trotsky rejected the first draft resolution, leading to a special group (Stalin, Trotsky, Kamenev) to draft a mutually acceptable compromise. On 5 December the Politburo and Central Control Commission unanimously adopted this final draft. On 8 December, Trotsky published an open letter expounding on the resolution's ideas. The \"troika\" used this letter to launch a campaign against Trotsky, accusing him of factionalism, setting \"the youth against the fundamental generation of old revolutionary Bolsheviks\", and other \"sins\".\nTrotsky defended his position in seven letters collected as \"The New Course\" in January 1924. The illusion of a \"monolithic Bolshevik leadership\" shattered, and a lively intra-Party discussion ensued in local organisations and \"Pravda\" pages through December and January, until the XIIIth Party Conference (16\u201318 January 1924). Opponents of the Central Committee's position became known as the Left Opposition. In 1924, at Sverdlov University conferences, Stalin critically cited \"the Permanentists\" as Trotsky's followers of 'Permanent revolution'.\nSince the \"troika\" controlled the Party apparatus via Stalin's Secretariat and \"Pravda\" via editor Bukharin, it directed the discussion and delegate selection. Though Trotsky's position prevailed within the Red Army, Moscow universities, and received about half the votes in the Moscow Party organisation, it was defeated elsewhere. The Conference was packed with pro-\"troika\" delegates. Only three delegates voted for Trotsky's position, and the Conference denounced \"Trotskyism\" as a \"petty bourgeois deviation\".\nLeft Opposition members, representing many international elements, held high-ranking posts, with Christian Rakovsky, Adolph Joffe, and Nikolay Krestinsky serving as ambassadors in London, Paris, Tokyo, and Berlin. Internationally, Trotsky's opposition received support from several Central Committee members of foreign communist parties, including Rakovsky (Chairman of the Ukrainian Sovnarkom), Boris Souvarine of the French Communist Party, and the Central Committee of the Polish Communist Party (led by Maksymilian Horwitz, Maria Koszutska, and Adolf Warski).\nAfter Lenin's death (1924).\nThroughout most of 1924, there was little overt political disagreement within the Soviet leadership. Publicly, Trotsky remained a prominent Bolshevik leader, though his \"mistakes\" were often alluded to by \"troika\" partisans. Behind the scenes, he was cut off from decision-making. Politburo meetings were formalities; key decisions were made beforehand by the \"troika\" and its supporters. Trotsky's control over the military was undermined by reassigning his deputy, Ephraim Sklyansky, and appointing Mikhail Frunze, groomed to replace him.\nAt the XIIIth Party Congress in May, Trotsky delivered a conciliatory speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;None of us desires or is able to dispute the will of the Party. Clearly, the Party is always right... We can only be right with and by the Party, for history has provided no other way of being in the right. The English have a saying, \"My country, right or wrong\"... We have much better historical justification in saying whether it is right or wrong in certain individual concrete cases, it is my party... And if the Party adopts a decision which one or other of us thinks unjust, he will say, just or unjust, it is my party, and I shall support the consequences of the decision to the end.\nMeanwhile, the Left Opposition, which had formed somewhat unexpectedly in late 1923 and lacked a definite platform beyond general dissatisfaction with the intra-Party \"regime\", began to crystallise. It lost some less dedicated members due to \"troika\" harassment but started formulating a program. Economically, the Left Opposition opposed capitalist elements in the Soviet economy and advocated accelerated industrialisation through state-led policies, putting them at odds with Bukharin and Rykov (the \"Right\" wing) who supported the \"troika\". On world revolution, Trotsky and Karl Radek saw stability in Europe, while Stalin and Zinoviev predicted an \"acceleration\" of revolution in Western Europe in 1924. Theoretically, Trotsky remained committed to the idea that the Soviet Union could not create a true socialist society without world revolution, while Stalin gradually developed the policy of \"socialism in one country\". These ideological divisions formed the basis of the political divide.\nAt the XIIIth Congress, Kamenev and Zinoviev helped Stalin defuse Lenin's Testament, which had belatedly surfaced. Shortly after, the \"troika\", an alliance of convenience, showed signs of weakness. Stalin began making veiled accusations against Zinoviev and Kamenev. In October 1924, Trotsky published \"Lessons of October\", a summary of the 1917 revolution. He described Zinoviev and Kamenev's opposition to the Bolshevik seizure of power in 1917, something they preferred left unmentioned. This started a new intra-party struggle, the \"Literary Discussion\", with Zinoviev and Kamenev again allied with Stalin against Trotsky. Their criticism of Trotsky focused on:\nTrotsky, ill again, was unable to respond while his opponents mobilised to denounce him. They damaged his military reputation enough to force his resignation as People's Commissar of Army and Fleet Affairs and Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Council on 6 January 1925. Zinoviev demanded Trotsky's expulsion from the Party, but Stalin, playing the moderate, refused. Trotsky kept his Politburo seat but was effectively on probation.\nA year in the wilderness (1925).\n1925 was a difficult year for Trotsky. After the \"Literary Discussion\" and losing his Red Army posts, he was effectively unemployed through winter and spring. In May 1925 he received three posts: chairman of the Concessions Committee, head of the electro-technical board, and chairman of the scientific-technical board of industry. Trotsky wrote in \"My Life\" that he \"was taking a rest from politics\" and \"naturally plunged into the new line of work up to my ears\". He also delivered a tribute to Lenin in his 1925 short book, \"Lenin\".\nSome contemporary accounts depict a remote and distracted man. Later in the year, Trotsky resigned his two technical positions, citing Stalin-instigated interference and sabotage, and concentrated on the Concessions Committee.\nOne of the few political developments affecting Trotsky in 1925 was the American Marxist Max Eastman's book \"Since Lenin Died\" (1925), which described the controversy over Lenin's Testament. Trotsky publicly denied Eastman's statements in an article.\nMeanwhile, the \"troika\" finally broke up. Bukharin and Rykov sided with Stalin, while Krupskaya and Soviet Commissar of Finance Grigory Sokolnikov aligned with Zinoviev and Kamenev. The struggle became open at the September 1925 Central Committee meeting and peaked at the XIVth Party Congress in December 1925. Zinoviev and Kamenev, dubbed \"The New Opposition\", with only the Leningrad Party organisation behind them, were thoroughly defeated. Trotsky refused to get involved and did not speak at the Congress.\nUnited Opposition (1926\u20131927).\nIn early 1926, Zinoviev, Kamenev, and their \"New Opposition\" supporters gravitated towards Trotsky's supporters. The two groups soon formed an alliance, incorporating some smaller opposition groups, known as the United Opposition.\nThe United Opposition faced repeated threats of sanctions from the Stalinist leadership. Trotsky had to agree to tactical retreats, mainly to preserve his alliance with Zinoviev and Kamenev. The opposition remained united against Stalin throughout 1926 and 1927, especially regarding the Shanghai massacre. Stalinist methods against the Opposition became increasingly extreme. At the XVth Party Conference in October 1926, Trotsky could barely speak due to interruptions and catcalls; at its end, he lost his Politburo seat. In 1927, Stalin began using the GPU (Soviet secret police) to infiltrate and discredit the opposition. Rank-and-file oppositionists were increasingly harassed, sometimes expelled from the Party, and even arrested.\nSoviet policy toward the revolution in China became the ideological demarcation line. The 1911 Revolution began on 10 October 1911, leading to Emperor Puyi's abdication on 12 February 1912. Sun Yat-sen established the Republic of China, but it controlled little of the country, much of which was divided among warlords. The Republican government formed the Kuomintang (KMT). In 1920, the KMT opened relations with Soviet Russia. With Soviet help, the KMT built up its army. The planned Northern Expedition to crush northern warlords became a point of contention. Stalin urged the small Chinese Communist Party to merge with the KMT for a bourgeois revolution before attempting a Soviet-style workers' revolution.\nTrotsky wanted the Communist Party to complete an orthodox proletarian revolution and maintain clear class independence from the KMT. Stalin funded the KMT during the expedition. He countered Trotskyist criticism in a secret speech, saying Chiang Kai-shek's right-wing KMT were the only ones capable of defeating imperialists, that Chiang had funding from rich merchants, and his forces should be used until \"squeezed for all usefulness like a lemon before being discarded\". However, Chiang reversed the tables in the Shanghai massacre of 12 April 1927, massacring the Communists in Shanghai midway through the Northern Expedition.\nDefeat and exile (1927\u20131928).\nOn the tenth anniversary of the October Revolution in November 1927, the Opposition held a street demonstration in Moscow against Stalin's government. It was dispersed by Soviet authorities, and Trotsky was expelled from the Communist Party shortly thereafter. Trotsky delivered the eulogy at his friend Adolph Joffe's funeral in November 1927; it was his last public speech in the Soviet Union. When the XVth Party Congress made United Opposition views incompatible with Communist Party membership, Zinoviev, Kamenev, and their supporters capitulated and renounced their alliance with the Left Opposition. Trotsky and most of his followers refused to surrender. Trotsky was exiled to Alma Ata (now Almaty), Kazakhstan, on 31 January 1928. He was expelled from the Soviet Union to Turkey in February 1929, accompanied by his wife Natalia Sedova and their eldest son, Lev.\nFate of Left Oppositionists after Trotsky's exile (1929\u20131941).\nAfter Trotsky's expulsion, Trotskyists within the Soviet Union began to waver. Between 1929 and 1932, most leading Left Opposition members surrendered to Stalin, \"admitted their mistakes\", and were reinstated in the Communist Party. An initial exception was Christian Rakovsky, who inspired Trotsky from 1929 to 1934 with his refusal to capitulate as state suppression increased. In late 1932, Rakovsky failed to flee the Soviet Union and was exiled to Yakutia in March 1933. At Trotsky's request, the French mathematician and Trotskyist Jean Van Heijenoort, with Pierre Frank, unsuccessfully appealed to the influential Soviet author Maxim Gorky to intervene for Rakovsky, boarding Gorky's ship near Constantinople. According to Heijenoort, they only met Gorky's son, Maxim Peshkov, who promised to pass on their request. Rakovsky was the last prominent Trotskyist to capitulate, in April 1934. His letter to \"Pravda\", titled \"There Should Be No Mercy\", depicted Trotsky and his supporters as \"agents of the German Gestapo\". Rakovsky was appointed to high office in the Commissariat for Health and allowed to return to Moscow, also serving as Soviet ambassador to Japan in 1935. However, he was implicated in allegations concerning Sergey Kirov's murder and was arrested and imprisoned in late 1937 during the Great Purge.\nAlmost all Trotskyists remaining in the Soviet Union were executed in the Great Purges of 1936\u20131938. Rakovsky survived until the Medvedev Forest massacre of September 1941, where he was shot with 156 other prisoners on Stalin's orders, less than three months into the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union. Trotsky's sister and Kamenev's first wife, Olga Kameneva, was also among the Medvedev Forest victims.\nExile (1929\u20131940).\nTurkey.\nDeported from the Soviet Union in February 1929, Trotsky arrived in Turkey. For his first two months, he lived with his wife and eldest son at the Soviet Consulate in Istanbul and then a nearby hotel. In April 1929, Turkish authorities moved them to the island of B\u00fcy\u00fckada (Prinkipo), into a house called the Yanaros mansion. During his Turkish exile, Trotsky was under surveillance by Mustafa Kemal Pasha's police. He was also at risk from former White Army officers on Prinkipo. However, his European supporters volunteered as bodyguards, ensuring his safety. He requested entry to Belgium, France, Norway, Germany, and the United Kingdom, but all refused.\nSoon after arriving in Turkey, Trotsky established the \"Bulletin of the Opposition\", a Russian-language journal first published in July 1929 in Paris. In a 1931 letter titled \"What is Fascism\", he attempted to define fascism, asserting the Communist International wrongly described Primo de Rivera's dictatorship as \"fascist\" because it lacked a mass movement base in the lower classes.\nOn 20 February 1932 Trotsky and his family lost their Soviet citizenship and were forbidden to enter the Soviet Union. In 1932 he entered fascist Italy en route to a socialist conference in Denmark. By late 1932, Trotsky contacted the anti-Stalin opposition inside the USSR to discuss forming a bloc. There was no evidence of any alliance with Nazi Germany or the Empire of Japan, as the Soviet government claimed. Alleged bloc members included Zinovievites, rightists, and \"capitulated\" Trotskyists like Kamenev and Zinoviev. Trotsky feared the right gaining too much power within the bloc. The historian Pierre Brou\u00e9 concluded the bloc dissolved in early 1933, as some members like Zinoviev and Kamenev rejoined Stalin, and Trotsky's Harvard archive letters do not mention the bloc after 1932.\nFrance.\nIn July 1933 Prime Minister \u00c9douard Daladier offered Trotsky asylum; he accepted, but was forbidden to live in Paris and was soon under French police surveillance. From July 1933 to February 1934 Trotsky and his wife lived in Royan. The philosopher and activist Simone Weil arranged for them and their bodyguards to stay briefly at her parents' house. Following the 6 February 1934 crisis, French Minister of Internal Affairs Albert Sarraut signed a decree to deport Trotsky. However, no foreign government would accept him. French authorities then instructed Trotsky to move to a residence in the village of Barbizon under strict police surveillance, where his contact with the outside world became even more restricted than in Turkey. In May 1935, soon after France agreed to the Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance, Trotsky was officially told he was no longer welcome. He applied to move to Norway.\nNorway.\nAfter Justice Minister Trygve Lie granted permission, Trotsky and his wife became guests of Konrad Knudsen at Norderhov, near H\u00f8nefoss, living at Knudsen's house from 18 June 1935 to 2 September 1936. Trotsky was hospitalised for a few weeks at Oslo Community Hospital from 19 September 1935.\nFollowing French media complaints about Trotsky's role in encouraging the May\u2013June 1936 mass strikes in France with his articles, the Norwegian government, led by Johan Nygaardsvold, grew uneasy. In summer 1936, Trotsky's asylum became a political issue for the fascist Nasjonal Samling, led by Vidkun Quisling, alongside increased Soviet pressure. On 5 August 1936 Nasjonal Samling fascists burgled Knudsen's house while Trotsky and his wife were out. The burglars targeted Trotsky's works and archives. The raid was largely thwarted by Knudsen's daughter, Hj\u00f8rdis, though some papers were taken. \"Evidence\" from the burglary was used by the government against Trotsky.\nOn 14 August 1936 the Soviet TASS agency announced a \"Trotskyist\u2013Zinovievist\" plot and the imminent start of the Moscow Trials. Trotsky demanded a full, open inquiry. The accused, including Grigory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev, were sentenced to death and executed on 25 August 1936. On 26 August eight policemen arrived at Knudsen's house, demanding Trotsky sign new residency conditions: no writing on current politics, no interviews, and all correspondence inspected. Trotsky refused and was told he and his wife would be moved. The next day, police interrogated him about his political activities, officially citing him as a \"witness\" to the 5 August fascist raid.\nOn 2 September 1936 Trygve Lie ordered Trotsky and his wife transferred to a farm in Hurum, where they were under house arrest. Treatment at Hurum was harsh: confined indoors 22 hours daily under constant guard, with only one hour twice daily for walks. Trotsky was prevented from posting letters or responding to critics. Only his lawyers and Norwegian Labour Party Parliamentary leader Olav Scheflo were allowed visits. From October 1936, even outdoor walks were prohibited. Trotsky smuggled out one letter on 18 December 1936, \"The Moscow \"Confessions\"\". On 19 December 1936 they were deported on the Norwegian oil tanker \"Ruth\", guarded by Jonas Lie. Later, in Mexico, Trotsky scathingly criticised his treatment, accusing the Norwegian government of trying to silence his opposition to the Moscow Trials:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMexico.\nThe \"Ruth\" arrived in Mexico on 9 January 1937. President L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas welcomed Trotsky and arranged a special train, \"The Hidalgo\", to bring him to Mexico City from Tampico.\nFrom January 1937 to April 1939 Trotsky and his wife lived in Coyoac\u00e1n at La Casa Azul (The Blue House), home of the painter Frida Kahlo (with whom Trotsky had an affair) and her husband, Diego Rivera, also a painter. Kahlo later presented him with \"Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky\" on his birthday, the 20th anniversary of the October Revolution. His final move, after a break with Rivera, was to a residence on Avenida Viena in April 1939.\nTrotsky wrote prolifically in exile, including \"History of the Russian Revolution\" (1930) and \"The Revolution Betrayed\" (1936), a critique of the Soviet Union under Stalinism. He argued the Soviet state had become a \"degenerated workers' state\" controlled by an undemocratic bureaucracy, which would either be overthrown via a political revolution establishing workers' democracy, or degenerate into a capitalist class.\nIn Mexico, Trotsky worked closely with James P. Cannon, Joseph Hansen, and Farrell Dobbs of the Socialist Workers Party of the United States, and other supporters. Cannon, a long-time leader in the American communist movement, had supported Trotsky since reading his criticisms of the Soviet Union in 1928. Trotsky's critique of Stalinism, though banned, was distributed to Comintern leaders. Chen Duxiu, founder of the Chinese Communist Party, was another supporter.\nTrotsky collaborated with Andr\u00e9 Breton and Diego Rivera on the Manifesto for an Independent Revolutionary Art (1938), emphasising artistic freedom outside capitalist and Stalinist constraints. This inspired the International Federation of Independent Revolutionary Art (FIARI) in 1938, though it was short-lived, ending before 1940.\nMoscow show trials.\nIn August 1936 the first Moscow show trial of the \"Trotskyite\u2013Zinovievite Terrorist Center\" was staged. Zinoviev, Kamenev, and 14 other prominent Old Bolsheviks confessed to plotting with Trotsky to kill Stalin and other Soviet leaders. The court found all defendants guilty, sentencing them, including Trotsky in absentia, to death. The second show trial (Karl Radek, Grigori Sokolnikov, Yuri Pyatakov, and 14 others) in January 1937 linked more alleged conspiracies and crimes to Trotsky. These trials were widely seen as fabrications. In response, an independent Commission of Inquiry, chaired by the American philosopher John Dewey, was established. After investigating the allegations, the Dewey Commission found Trotsky not guilty of the charges made against him in the Moscow Trials. Its findings were published in the book \"Not Guilty\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Moscow trials are perpetuated under the banner of socialism. We will not concede this banner to the masters of falsehood! If our generation happens to be too weak to establish Socialism over the earth, we will hand the spotless banner down to our children. The struggle which is in the offing transcends by far the importance of individuals, factions and parties. It is the struggle for the future of all mankind. It will be severe, it will be lengthy. Whoever seeks physical comfort and spiritual calm let him step aside. In time of reaction it is more convenient to lean on the bureaucracy than on the truth. But all those for whom the word 'Socialism' is not a hollow sound but the content of their moral life\u2014forward! Neither threats nor persecutions nor violations can stop us! Be it even over our bleaching bones the future will triumph! We will blaze the trail for it. It will conquer! Under all the severe blows of fate, I shall be happy as in the best days of my youth; because, my friends, the highest human happiness is not the exploitation of the present but the preparation of the future.\u2014\u200a\nFourth International.\nInitially, Trotsky opposed establishing parallel communist parties or a parallel international organisation to compete with the Third International (Comintern), fearing it would split the communist movement. He changed his mind in mid-1933 after the Nazi takeover in Germany and the Comintern's response. He stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An organization which was not roused by the thunder of fascism and which submits docilely to such outrageous acts of the bureaucracy demonstrates thereby that it is dead and that nothing can ever revive it... In all our subsequent work it is necessary to take as our point of departure the historical collapse of the official Communist International.\nIn 1938 Trotsky and his supporters founded the Fourth International, intended as a revolutionary and internationalist alternative to the Stalinist Comintern.\nThe Dies Committee.\nIn late 1939 Trotsky agreed to appear as a witness before the Dies Committee of the United States House of Representatives, a precursor to the House Committee on Un-American Activities. Representative Martin Dies Jr., the committee chairman, sought the suppression of the American Communist Party. Trotsky intended to use the forum to expose NKVD activities against him and his followers. He also planned to argue against suppressing the American Communist Party and to call for transforming World War II into a world revolution. Many supporters opposed his appearance. When the committee learned the nature of Trotsky's intended testimony, it refused to hear him, and he was denied a US visa. The Communist Party of the Soviet Union immediately accused Trotsky of being paid by oil magnates and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).\nFinal months.\nAfter quarrelling with Diego Rivera, Trotsky moved to his final residence on Avenida Viena in April 1939. On 27 February 1940 he wrote \"Trotsky's Testament\", expressing his final thoughts. Suffering from high blood pressure, he feared a cerebral haemorrhage. He reiterated his \"unshaken faith in a communist future\". Forcefully denying Stalin's accusations of betraying the working class, he thanked his friends and, above all, his wife, Natalia Sedova, for their loyal support:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAssassination.\nAfter a failed assassination attempt in March 1939, Stalin assigned the NKVD officer Pavel Sudoplatov to organise Trotsky's murder. Sudoplatov, in turn, co-opted Nahum Eitingon. According to Sudoplatov's \"Special Tasks\", the NKVD set up three autonomous agent networks for the task, separate from existing US and Mexican spy networks.\nOn 24 May 1940 Trotsky survived a raid on his villa by armed assassins led by the NKVD agent Iosif Grigulevich and the Mexican painter David Alfaro Siqueiros. Trotsky's 14-year-old grandson, Vsevolod Platonovich \"Esteban\" Volkov (7 March 1926 \u2013 16 June 2023), was shot in the foot. A young assistant and bodyguard, Robert Sheldon Harte, disappeared with the attackers and was later found murdered; it is probable he was an accomplice who granted them access. Trotsky's other guards fended off the attackers. Following this, Trotsky wrote an article, \"Stalin Seeks My Death\" (8 June 1940), stating another attempt was certain.\nOn 20 August 1940 Trotsky was attacked in his study by the Spanish-born NKVD agent Ram\u00f3n Mercader, who used an ice axe. The operation was codenamed \"Utka\" (Duck) within the NKVD.\nA mountaineering ice axe has a narrow pick and a flat, wide adze. The adze struck Trotsky, fracturing his parietal bone and penetrating into his brain. The blow was bungled and failed to kill him instantly. Witnesses stated Trotsky spat on Mercader and struggled fiercely, breaking Mercader's hand. Hearing the commotion, Trotsky's bodyguards burst in and nearly beat Mercader to death, but Trotsky stopped them, laboriously stating the assassin should be made to answer questions. Trotsky was taken to a hospital and operated on but died at age 60 on 21 August 1940 from blood loss and shock. Mercader later testified:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I laid my raincoat on the table in such a way as to be able to remove the ice axe which was in the pocket. I decided not to miss the wonderful opportunity that presented itself. The moment Trotsky began reading the article, he gave me my chance; I took out the ice axe from the raincoat, gripped it in my hand and, with my eyes closed, dealt him a terrible blow on the head.\nAccording to James P. Cannon, secretary of the American Socialist Workers Party, Trotsky's last words were \"I will not survive this attack. Stalin has finally accomplished the task he attempted unsuccessfully before.\" Mercader was convicted and spent 20 years in a Mexican prison. Stalin claimed the assassin was a dangerous Trotskyist. Mercader initially received no awards, though his mother was presented with the Order of Lenin for her role. Upon his release in 1960 and arrival in the USSR in 1961, Leonid Brezhnev signed a decree awarding Mercader the Order of Lenin, the Gold Star, and the title Hero of the Soviet Union \"for the special deed\". KGB boss Alexander Shelepin presented these awards to Mercader personally.\nAn estimated 300,000 people passed by Trotsky's funeral casket in Mexico City over several days by 27 August 1940.\nPersonality and characteristics.\nTrotsky was regarded as an outstanding orator, preeminent theoretician, and organiser who, in the historian Michael Kort's view, \"forged and directed the Red Army\". He was an original Politburo member in Lenin's government. The biographer Isaac Deutscher considered him the \"prompter of [the] planned economy and industrialization\" in the early Soviet Union.\nThe Old Bolshevik Anatoly Lunacharsky viewed Trotsky as the best-prepared Social Democratic leader during the 1905\u20131907 revolution, stating he \"emerged from the revolution having acquired an enormous degree of popularity, whereas neither Lenin nor Martov had effectively gained any at all\". His personal secretary and later historian of mathematical logic, Jean van Heijenoort, found him amicable, inquisitive, and occasionally charming with new acquaintances in his final years in Mexico.\nThe historian Dmitri Volkogonov characterised him as a \"vivid, complex, multi-faceted personality... remembered with hatred and respect, anger and admiration\" decades after his assassination. Volkogonov considered Trotsky \"far superior\" to figures like Vyacheslav Molotov, Lazar Kaganovich, Zhdanov, and \"also superior to Stalin and Stalin knew it\".\nHis biographer Robert Service described him as \"volatile and untrustworthy\", an \"arrogant individual\" who impressed supporters even during \"personal adversity in the 1920s and 1930s\" but failed to \"coax and encourage them to the full\". Service stated Trotsky gave \"minimum time to the Jewish question\" and believed \"he ceased to be a Jew in any important sense because Marxism had burned out the fortuitous residues of his origins\".\nThe political scientist August Nimtz regarded Trotsky as having better foresight than many Marxist and non-Marxist observers with his work \"The Revolution Betrayed\" (1936), arguing the Stalinist regime was an \"ephemeral phenomenon\", a view Nimtz believed was proven by the Soviet collapse after 1989. Other scholars have similarly described Trotsky's prescient judgement on events like the Stalinist alliance with the Kuomintang, the rise of Nazi Germany, and the Spanish Civil War. Deutscher also referenced his \"uncanny clear sightedness\" in predicting the emergence of a single dictator who would \"substitute himself\" for the Central Committee, the party, and the working class.\nTrotsky was a Marxist intellectual. The Russian historian Vladimir Buldakov considered Trotsky, in some respects, a \"typical representative\" of \"Russia's radical intelligentsia\" with \"elements of bourgeois origin\". His diverse and profound interests exceeded those of other Bolshevik theoreticians like Nikolai Bukharin. Aside from political activism, Trotsky worked as a statistician and journalist. He loved literature, particularly French novels. He and Natalia Sedova enjoyed Viennese galleries and visited museums like the Louvre and Tate Gallery. He retained a personal interest in science from his youth studying engineering, mathematics, and physics.\nHis arch-enemy, Stalin, read and sometimes appreciated much of his writing. According to Rubenstein, Stalin acknowledged that \"after Lenin, Trotsky was the most popular figure in the country\" at the Civil War's end. Stalin himself wrote in a 1918 \"Pravda\" editorial: \"All practical work in connection with the organization of the uprising was done under the immediate direction of Comrade Trotsky, the president of the Petrograd Soviet\".\nUpon his 1929 exile, eighteen close relatives remained in the Soviet Union; all faced repression. Seven family members, including his son Sergei Sedov, sister Olga Kameneva, and brother Aleksandr Bronstein, were shot. He spoke several European languages \"with a markedly Russian accent\" and identified as a cosmopolitan and internationalist. Trotsky wrote about 30,000 documents, most now in archives. Deutscher stated Trotsky wrote most Soviet manifestos and resolutions, edited its \"Izvestia\" newspaper, and composed the Red Army's oath of loyalty.\nPolitical stature and conflicts with Stalin.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Had Trotsky won the struggle to succeed Lenin, the character of the Soviet regime would almost certainly have been substantially different, particularly in foreign policy, cultural policy, and the extent of terroristic repression. Trotsky's failure, however, seems to have been almost inevitable, considering his own qualities and the conditions of authoritarian rule by the Communist Party organization.\n\u2014The historian Robert Vincent Daniels, 1993\nTrotsky lacked the political acumen to succeed against Stalin's machinations. Lenin had encouraged Trotsky to challenge Stalin at the Twelfth Party Congress over the Georgian Affair, but Trotsky relented. The historian Martin McCauley commented that Trotsky \"displayed a lamentable lack of political judgement\" on multiple occasions, such as declining Lenin's proposal to become deputy chairman of Sovnarkom, failing to build a power base before forming a bloc with Lenin against the Orgburo, and not immediately recognising the \"troika\" established to prevent his succession. The biographer Joshua Rubenstein attributed Trotsky's decision to decline Lenin's proposal to his belief the position had \"little authority of its own\" and overlapped with other government and party officials. Deutscher believed he underestimated Stalin's cunning, ruthlessness, and tenacity on several occasions.\nHis enmity with Stalin developed during the Civil War due to Stalin's disregard for military specialists whom Trotsky considered indispensable. In Tsaritsyn, Stalin ordered several specialists imprisoned on a barge in the Volga; the floating prison was sunk, and the officers perished. Another instance was Stalin's disobedience of Trotsky's order to march on Warsaw, contributing to the Red Army's defeat at the Battle of Warsaw in 1920. The former Politburo secretary Boris Bazhanov claimed Stalin's antagonism also stemmed from Trotsky's Jewishness and that Stalin refused to obey his military orders during the Civil War. According to Rogovin, Trotsky received hundreds of letters reporting the use of antisemitic methods during the inter-party struggle between Stalin and the United Opposition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWith all the greater frankness can I state how, in my view, the Soviet government should act in case of a fascist upheaval in Germany. In their place, I would, at the very moment of receiving telegraphic news of this event, sign a mobilisation order calling up several age groups. In the face of a mortal enemy, when the logic of the situation points to inevitable war, it would be irresponsible and unpardonable to give that enemy time to establish himself, to consolidate his positions, to conclude alliances\u2026 and to work out the plan to attack.\n \u2014Trotsky describing in 1932 the military measures he would have taken, in place of Stalin, to counter the rise of Nazi Germany.\nRubenstein regarded Trotsky's position among Soviet elites as largely dependent on Lenin, adding that he had an outsider image within party circles as he had previously been an \"outspoken critic of Lenin\". Conversely, Volkogonov stated Trotsky had the support of many party intellectuals, but this was overshadowed by Stalin's control of the vast party apparatus, including the GPU and party cadres.\nTrotsky attributed his political defeat to external, objective conditions rather than Stalin's individual qualities. He argued that failed international insurrections (e.g., Bulgaria 1923, China 1927) diminished prospects for world socialism and demoralised the Russian working class, strengthening internal Soviet bureaucracy. The Russian historian Vadim Rogovin remarked that Trotsky, in the 1930s, did not abandon hope for revolutionary spread, arguing his prognosis was plausible as many European countries (Germany, France, especially Spain) \"went through a period of revolutionary crisis\". However, Daniels contended Trotsky would have been no more prepared than other Bolsheviks to risk war or lose trade opportunities, despite his support for world revolution.\nRelations with Lenin.\nTrotsky's relationship with Lenin is a source of intense historical debate. The historian Paul Le Blanc and the philosopher Michael L\u00f6wy described Lenin and Trotsky as the \"widely leading figures in the Russia's Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 as well as in the final years of the rising world communist movement\".\nSwain, however, viewed the notion of Trotsky as Lenin's natural heir as a myth, citing scholars like Erik Van Ree, James D. White, and Richard B. Day, who challenged the traditional characterisation of their relationship. Le Blanc disputed Swain's representation, referencing historians across generations including E. H. Carr, Isaac Deutscher, Moshe Lewin, Ronald Grigor Suny, and W. Bruce Lincoln. According to Le Blanc, these historians generally supported the view that Lenin desired a collective leadership in which Trotsky played an important role, and within which Stalin would be dramatically demoted or removed.\nThe historian Roy Medvedev noted the close association of Trotsky and Lenin in the Soviet republic from 1921 to 1924, mentioning public commendations where \"greetings in honour of comrades Lenin and Trotsky were announced at many rallies and meetings, and portraits of Lenin and Trotsky hung on the walls of many Soviet and party institutions\".\nLenin's succession.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nComrade Trotsky, on the other hand, as his struggle against the C.C. on the question of the People's Commissariat of Communications has already proved, is distinguished not only by outstanding ability. He is personally perhaps the most capable man in the present C.C., but he has displayed excessive self-assurance and shown excessive preoccupation with the purely administrative side of the work.\n\u2014Lenin's Testament, 1923 Most historians consider the document an accurate reflection of Lenin's views.\nTrotsky was generally viewed as Lenin's choice as a successor in 1923. He had been nominated as Lenin's deputy in 1922 and 1923 and was expected to assume responsibility over the Council of National Economy or Gosplan. Lenin and Trotsky were the only Soviet leaders elected honorary presidents of the Communist International. Before the 1921 factional ban, Trotsky had considerable support among party activists and Central Committee members against Lenin's narrow majority. His supporters also controlled the Orgburo and Party Secretariat before Stalin's appointment as General Secretary. McCauley states Lenin planned to retire and arranged for Trotsky to speak on his behalf as his natural successor, which triggered the \"troika's\" formation. The historian Orlando Figes highlighted the increasing alignment between Lenin and Trotsky in 1923, citing Lenin's testament (critical of Stalin and bureaucracy) and their shared positions on foreign trade, party reform, and the Georgian affair.\nThe Soviet historian Victor Danilov believed Lenin's proposed appointment of Trotsky as deputy \"would have made him in effect Lenin's successor\". Danilov cited Politburo Secretary Bazhanov's notes of Trotsky's concluding speech in 1923, where Trotsky explained declining the deputy position due to concerns his \"Jewish origins\" could accentuate antisemitic attitudes towards the Soviet Union. McCauley stated Trotsky would \"almost certainly\" have become successor had Lenin died after his first stroke in 1922. Deutscher noted Zinoviev was Lenin's closest disciple from 1907 to 1917, but Zinoviev's opposition to the October Revolution strained his relations with Lenin.\nOpponents like Winston Churchill argued \"Lenin [had] indeed regarded Trotsky as his political heir\" and sought to protect him before his 1924 death. In \"My Life\", Trotsky maintained Lenin intended him as successor as Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, beginning with his proposed appointment as deputy. He explained this process would have started after their 1923 alliance with a commission to mitigate state bureaucracy, facilitating his party succession.\nDuring the dispute about whether to maintain the state monopoly on foreign trade in particular Lenin and Trotsky closed ranks. Too sick to attend the meeting himself Lenin, in a letter addressed to Stalin on 15 December 1922, stated, \u201cI have also come to an arrangement with Trotsky to stand up for my views of the foreign trade monopoly\u201d and \u201cIf the idea should arise, \u2026 to postpone it until the next plenum, I should most resolutely object to this, because I am sure that Trotsky will be able to stand up for my views just as well as I myself\u201d. Following the plenum rescinding their proposal to relax the foreign trade monopoly, Lenin wrote to Trotsky on 18 December 1922, \u201cIt looks as though it has been possible to take the position without a single shot, by a simple maneuver. I suggest that we should not stop and should continue the offensive\u201d.\nLegacy.\nIn 1923 the historic town of Gatchina in Petrograd Governorate (now Leningrad Oblast) was renamed Trotsk () by Soviet authorities after Trotsky. After Stalin became General Secretary, Trotsky was gradually exiled, and the town was renamed Krasnogvardeysk (, \"Red Guard City\") in 1929. In 1944, to boost morale, its historic name Gatchina was restored.\nTrotsky's house in Coyoac\u00e1n is preserved much as it was on the day of his assassination and is now the Leon Trotsky House Museum, run by a board that included his grandson Esteban Volkov (1926\u20132023). His grave is on its grounds. The \"International Friends of the Leon Trotsky Museum\" foundation raises funds to improve the museum.\nShortly before his assassination, Trotsky agreed to sell most of his remaining papers to Harvard University. After his death, his widow, Natalya Sedova, collected his remaining papers and sent them to Harvard. Over the years, Harvard acquired additional papers hidden from Soviet and Nazi agents in Europe. These papers now occupy of shelf space in Harvard's Houghton Library.\nTrotsky was never rehabilitated by the Soviet government, despite de-Stalinisation-era rehabilitations of most other Old Bolsheviks. His son, Sergei Sedov (died 1937), was rehabilitated in 1988, as was Nikolai Bukharin. Beginning in 1989, Trotsky's books, forbidden until 1987, were published in the Soviet Union. Trotsky was rehabilitated on 16 June 2001 by the General Prosecutor's Office of the Russian Federation.\nThe historian Harold Shukman assessed conflicting perspectives on Trotsky's legacy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Trotsky's legacy, unlike those of Stalin and Lenin, had long been submerged and obliterated as a topic of debate, and his place in Soviet history books had correspondingly diminished to one of no importance. For Western readers, however, Trotsky has always been one of the most enigmatic and powerful personalities of the Russian revolution, a Mephistophelian figure whose life ended in an appropriately dramatic way.\nThe Political theorist and chairman of the International Editorial Board of the Trotskyist World Socialist Web Site, associated with the International Committee of the Fourth International, David North, attributed Trotsky's diminished historical influence to the \"virtually unlimited resources of the Soviet regime, and of Stalinist-run parties throughout the world, [which] were devoted to blackguarding Trotsky as an anti-Soviet saboteur, terrorist and fascist agent. Within the Soviet Union, his political co-thinkers, past and present, were ruthlessly exterminated\". North also criticised biographical literature on Trotsky by some historians (Ian Thatcher, Geoffrey Swain, Robert Service), viewing these trends as a \"confluence of neo-Stalinist falsification and traditional Anglo-American anti-Communism\".\nIn 2018 the University College London Professor of Management John Kelly wrote that \"almost 80 years after Leon Trotsky founded the Fourth International, there are now Trotskyite organisations in 57 countries, including most of Western Europe and Latin America\". However, he argued no Trotskyist group had ever led a revolution or built an enduring mass political party. The historian Christian H\u00f8gsbjerg countered that academic literature on Trotskyism minimised its historical role in building social movements, stressing British Trotskyists' key role in the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign (1966\u20131971), Anti-Nazi League (1977\u20131981), All Britain Anti-Poll Tax Federation (1989\u20131991), and Stop the War Coalition (from 2001).\nOutside the Fourth International, Trotsky has been admired by figures including the philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre, the military general Mikhail Tukhachevsky, the Marxist theorist Rosa Luxemburg, the economist Paul Sweezy, the philosopher John Dewey, the historian A. J. P. Taylor, the psychoanalyst Erich Fromm, the philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre, the literary critic Edmund Wilson, the painter Diego Rivera, the socialist leader Martin Tranm\u00e6l, and the writer Lu Xun.\nHistorical reputation.\nTrotsky's legacy in modern historiography has evoked a range of conflicting and diverse interpretations. Before the October Revolution, he was part of an old radical democracy which included Left Mensheviks and Left Bolsheviks. By 1917, Bolshevik figures like Anatoly Lunacharsky, Moisei Uritsky, and Dmitry Manuilsky held him in comparable stature to Lenin; with the October insurrection having been carried through in accordance with Trotsky's plan of action. He was viewed by contemporaries in the early Soviet period and a number of later historians as the hero of the revolution.\nIn the Soviet Union his reputation deteriorated during the succession struggle as his views were presented as sectarian and anti-Leninist. Throughout the Stalin era, his name and image were erased from history books, museums, and films, becoming a convenient bogeyman associated with ideological heresy. His works remained banned until the Gorbachev era. After de-Stalinisation, later Soviet and Russian historians re-evaluated his role with varying interpretations.\nScholarly consensus holds that Trotsky had demonstrated remarkable leadership of the Red Army during the Civil War. He received the Order of the Red Banner for his role, including organising Petrograd's defence when other Bolshevik leaders were prepared to abandon it. Swain asserted the Bolsheviks would certainly have lost the Civil War within a year without Trotsky leading the Red Army.\nSome scholars and Western socialists have argued that Trotsky represented a more democratic alternative to Stalin, emphasising his pre-Civil War activities and leadership of the Left Opposition. Deutscher described Trotsky as the \"Soviet's moving spirit\" in 1905, representing Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, and other Soviets. Trotsky proposed electing a new Soviet presidium with other socialist parties based on proportional representation in September 1917. Rogovin argued the Left Opposition, led by Trotsky, represented a \"real alternative to Stalinism\", which was Stalin's primary motive for the Great Terror. Daniels stated that the most distinctive features of Stalin's rule such as his campaigns against \"bourgeois experts\" as seen with \"the Shakhty trials, his contemptuous anti-intellectualism and the dogmatization of Marxism, the purges\u2014run totally counter to Trotsky's thought\".\nConversely, figures such as Volkogonov have strongly criticised his defence of the Red Terror and the dictatorship of the proletariat. Service argued that his \"ideas and practices laid several foundation stones for the erection of the Stalinist political, economic, social and even cultural edifice\". Cherniaev considered Trotsky largely responsible for establishing a one-party, authoritarian state and initiating military practices like summary executions, which later became standard in the Stalinist era. Thatcher cited Trotsky's defence of terror in \"\" but acknowledged his capacity for leniency, noting he personally urged humane treatment for White army deserters.\nOther writers believe Trotsky has been maligned and caricatured, necessitating historical reappraisal. The French socialist Pierre Brou\u00e9 criticised Western representations of Trotsky's role in the Kronstadt rebellion, arguing they falsely presented him as the principal figure responsible for the repression. Brou\u00e9 added that military tribunals and executions for desertion were common features of all wars, not exclusive to the Red Army under Trotsky. The historian Bertrand Patenaude regarded Service's characterisation of Trotsky as a \"mass murderer and a terrorist\" as reflective of a wider attempt to discredit him, noting Service's work featured inaccuracies and distortions of the historical record.\nVarious historians have credited Trotsky and the Left Opposition with shifting Soviet economic orientation from the New Economic Policy towards a planned economy through their proposals for mass industrialisation. Trotsky delivered a joint report to the April 1926 Central Committee Plenum proposing national industrialisation and replacing annual plans with five-year plans. His proposals were rejected by the Central Committee majority (controlled by the troika) and derided by Stalin at the time. The eventual adoption of five-year plans in 1928 served as the basis for Soviet modernisation.\nSeveral scholars have regarded his historical writings on the Soviet bureaucracy as having considerable influence in shaping the receptive attitudes of later Marxists and many non-Marxists. Trotsky associated bureaucratism with authoritarianism, excessive centralism, and conservatism. The political scientist Baruch Knei-Paz argued Trotsky did more than any other political figure to \"show the historical and social roots of Stalinism\" as a bureaucratic system. Stafford Beer, a British cyberneticist who worked on the decentralised form of economic planning, Project Cybersyn (1970\u20131973), was reportedly influenced by Trotsky's critique of the Soviet bureaucracy. Professional historians have noted the literary value of his social analysis in works like \"1905\" and \"The History of the Russian Revolution\" for wider historiography.\nPolitical ideology and contributions to Marxism.\nTrotsky considered himself a \"Bolshevik-Leninist\", advocating for the establishment of a vanguard party. He viewed himself as an advocate of orthodox Marxism. Trotsky adhered to scientific socialism, seeing it as a conscious expression of historical processes. His politics differed from those of Stalin or Mao Zedong, most importantly in his rejection of \"socialism in one country\" and his insistence on the need for an international \"permanent revolution\".\nIn the post-Lenin struggle, Trotsky and the Left/United Opposition advocated rapid industrialisation, voluntary agricultural collectivisation, and the expansion of workers' democracy. In 1936 Trotsky called for restoring the right of criticism in areas like economic policy, revitalising trade unions, and allowing free elections involving multiple Soviet parties. In the \"Transitional Program\" (drafted for the 1938 founding congress of the Fourth International), Trotsky reiterated the need for political pluralism and workers' control of production. Supporters of the Fourth International echo Trotsky's opposition to Stalinist totalitarianism, advocating political revolution and arguing socialism cannot sustain itself without democracy.\nEconomic programme.\nTrotsky was an early proponent of economic planning (from 1923) and favoured accelerated industrialisation. In 1921 he supported strengthening Gosplan to guide balanced economic reconstruction after the Civil War. He also urged economic decentralisation between the state, oblast regions, and factories to counter inefficiency and bureaucracy.\nHe had proposed the principles underlying the New Economic Policy (NEP) in 1920 to mitigate urgent economic problems from war communism, later privately reproaching Lenin for the delayed government response in 1921\u20131922. His position differed from the majority who fully supported the NEP. Trotsky believed planning and NEP should coexist in a mixed framework until the socialist sector gradually superseded private industry. He found allies among economic theorists and administrators like Yevgeni Preobrazhensky and Georgy Pyatakov (deputy chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the National Economy). Intellectuals formed the core of the Left Opposition during the succession period.\nTrotsky specified the need for \"overall guidance in planning i.e. the systematic co-ordination of the fundamental sectors of the state economy in the process of adapting to the present market\" and urged for a national plan alongside currency stabilisation. He rejected the Stalinist focus on heavy industry, proposing instead the use of foreign trade as an accelerator and directing investments via comparative coefficients.\nIn response to the Scissors Crisis (1923\u20131924), which strained worker-peasant relations, Trotsky and the Left Opposition developed economic proposals including a progressive tax on wealthier groups (kulaks, NEPmen), balancing import-export to purchase machinery abroad, and accelerating industrialisation. In 1932\u20131933, Trotsky maintained the need for mass participation in economic planning. When questioned by the Dewey Commission in 1937 about industrialisation, he emphasised the need for Soviet democracy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The successes are very important, and I affirmed it every time. They are due to the abolition of private property and to the possibilities inherent in planned economy. But, they \u2013 I cannot say exactly \u2013 but I will say two or three times less than they could be under a regime of Soviet democracy.\nAccording to Fitzpatrick, the scholarly consensus is that Stalin appropriated the Left Opposition's position on industrialisation and collectivisation. Other scholars argue Trotsky's economic programme differed from Stalin's forced collectivisation (post-1928) due to the latter's brutality.\nPermanent Revolution.\nPermanent Revolution theory holds that in countries with delayed bourgeois democratic development, these tasks can only be accomplished by establishing a workers' state, which inevitably involves inroads against capitalist property. Thus, bourgeois democratic tasks transition into proletarian ones. Though closely associated with Trotsky, the call for \"Permanent Revolution\" first appeared in Karl Marx's and Friedrich Engels's March 1850 https:// to the Central Committee of the Communist League:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is our interest and our task to make the revolution permanent until all the more or less propertied classes have been driven from their ruling positions, until the proletariat has conquered state power and until the association of the proletarians has progressed sufficiently far\u2014not only in one country but in all the leading countries of the world\u2014that competition between the proletarians of these countries ceases and at least the decisive forces of production are concentrated in the hands of the workers. ... Their battle-cry must be: The Permanent Revolution.\nTrotsky's conception, drawing on the Russian Marxist founder Georgy Plekhanov, argued that in \"backward\" countries, the bourgeoisie itself could not achieve bourgeois democratic tasks. Trotsky developed this with Alexander Parvus in 1904\u20131905. Relevant articles were collected in Trotsky's \"1905\" and \"Permanent Revolution\" (which includes his essay \"Results and Prospects\"). Some Trotskyists argue the state of the Third World demonstrates capitalism offers no way forward for underdeveloped countries, proving the theory's central tenet.\nAccording to Deutscher, Trotsky supported revolution through proletarian internationalism but opposed achieving it via military conquest. Deutscher cites Trotsky's opposition to the Polish\u2013Soviet War (1920), his proposed armistice with the Entente, and his temperance regarding staging anti-British revolts in the Middle East.\nUnited front and theory of fascism.\nTrotsky was a central figure in the Comintern during its first four congresses, helping generalise Bolshevik strategy and tactics to new Communist parties. From 1921, the united front\u2014a method uniting revolutionaries and reformists in common struggle while winning workers to revolution\u2014was the central tactic advocated by the Comintern after the German revolution's defeat.\nTrotsky strongly criticised the shifting Comintern policy under Stalin that directed German Communists to treat social democrats as \"social fascists\". The historian Bertrand Patenaude believed this Comintern policy facilitated Hitler's rise. The Marxist theorist Hillel Ticktin argued Trotsky's political strategy, emphasising an organisational bloc between the German Communist Party and Social Democratic Party during the interwar period, likely would have prevented Hitler's ascent to power. Trotsky formulated a theory of fascism, analyzing Italian Fascism and the early emergence of Nazi Germany (1930\u20131933) through a dialectical interpretation.\nAfter exile, Trotsky continued advocating a united front against fascism in Germany and Spain. According to Joseph Choonara of the British Socialist Workers Party, his articles on the united front represent an essential part of his political legacy.\nUneven and combined development.\nThe concept of uneven and combined development derived from Trotsky's political theories. Developed alongside permanent revolution theory to explain Russia's historical context, he later elaborated on it to explain specific laws of uneven development (1930) and conditions for possible revolutionary scenarios. According to Thatcher, this theory was later generalised to \"the entire history of mankind\".\nThe political scientists Emanuele Saccarelli and Latha Varadarajan valued his theory as a \"signal contribution\" to international relations, arguing it presented \"a specific understanding of capitalist development as 'uneven', insofar as it systematically featured geographically divergent 'advanced' and 'backward' regions\" across the world economy.\nLiterary criticism and socialist culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFaith merely promises to move mountains; but technology, which takes nothing 'on faith', is actually able to cut down mountains and move them. Up to now this was done for industrial purposes (mines) or for railways (tunnels); in the future this will be done on an immeasurably larger scale, according to a general industrial and artistic plan. Man will occupy himself with re-registering mountains and rivers, and will earnestly and repeatedly make improvements in nature.\n\u2014Trotsky, \"Literature and Revolution\", 1924\nIn \"Literature and Revolution\" (1924) Trotsky examined aesthetic issues related to class and the Russian revolution. Soviet scholar Robert Bird considered it the \"first systematic treatment of art by a Communist leader\" and a catalyst for later Marxist cultural and critical theories. Trotsky defended intellectual autonomy regarding literary movements and scientific theories like Freudian psychoanalysis and Albert Einstein's theory of relativity, theories increasingly marginalised during the Stalin era. He later co-authored the 1938 \"Manifesto for an Independent Revolutionary Art\" with endorsements from Andr\u00e9 Breton and Diego Rivera. Trotsky's writings on literature, advocating tolerance, limited censorship, and respect for literary tradition (e.g., his 1923 survey), strongly appealed to the New York Intellectuals.\nTrotsky critiqued contemporary literary movements like Futurism and emphasised cultural autonomy for developing socialist culture. According to the literary critic Terry Eagleton, Trotsky recognised, \"like Lenin on the need for a socialist culture to absorb the finest products of bourgeois art\". Trotsky viewed proletarian culture as \"temporary and transitional\", providing foundations for a classless culture. He argued economic well-being and emancipation from material constraints were prerequisites for artistic creativity.\nThe political scientist Baruch Knei-Paz characterised Trotsky's view of the party's role as transmitting culture, raising educational standards, and facilitating entry into the cultural sphere, but leaving artistic creation (language, presentation) to the practitioner. Knei-Paz noted key distinctions between Trotsky's approach and Stalin's cultural policy in the 1930s.\nSee also.\nIn popular culture\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks by Trotsky.\n\"See also: Leon Trotsky bibliography\"\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17891", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17891", "title": "Latin (disambiguation)", "text": "Latin is an Italic language, originally spoken in ancient Rome and its empire.\nLatin may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17892", "revid": "50737737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17892", "title": "Reference desk", "text": "Public service counter in a library\nThe reference desk or information desk of a library is a public service counter where professional librarians provide library users with direction to library materials, advice on library collections and services, and expertise on multiple kinds of information from multiple sources.\nPurpose and usage.\nLibrary users can consult the staff at the reference desk for help in finding information. Using a structured reference interview, the librarian works with the library user to clarify their needs and determine what information sources will fill them. To borrow a medical analogy, reference librarians diagnose and treat information deficiencies.\nThe ultimate help provided may consist of reading material in the form of a book or journal article, instruction in the use of specific searchable information resources such as the library's online catalog, or subscription bibliographic/full text databases, or simply factual information drawn from the library's print or online reference collection. Information is also provided to patrons through electronic resources. Typically, a reference desk can be consulted either in person, by telephone, through email or online chat, although a library user may be asked to come to the library in person for help with more involved research questions. A staffed and knowledgeable reference desk is an essential part of a library.\nThe services that are provided at a reference desk may vary depending on the type of library, its purpose, its resources, and its staff. The services of circulation and reference desks are also sometimes combined.\nHistory.\nReference services did not become commonplace in libraries until the late 1800s. These services initially began in public libraries. At first librarians were hesitant to offer reference services because many libraries did not have a large enough staff to provide the services without other duties being neglected. Beginning in 1883 with the Boston Public Library, libraries began to hire librarians whose primary duty was to provide reference services.\nOne of the earliest proponents of references services was Samuel Swett Green. He wrote an article titled \"Personal Relations Between Librarians and Readers\" which had a large impact on the future of reference services.\nUtor (2008) defined reference services as a direct personal assistance to readers seeking information through direct contact between the reference librarian and the user.\nReference desks changed dramatically with the emergence of information technology. During the 2020 pandemic, there was a surge of virtual information desks. It has been found that chat, email, and web conferencing formats have become adequate substitutions for in-person conversations. AI chatbots are also being used in academic libraries to address typical information inquiries, although their use is still being tested.\nResources.\nResources that are often kept at a library reference desk may include:\nServices.\nServices that are often available at a library reference desk include:\nThe librarian who staffs the reference desk can usually do the following by virtue of their professional training and experience:\nStaff qualifications.\nIn the United States, those who staff library reference desks are usually required to have a master's degree in library science from a program accredited by the American Library Association. \nAcademic librarians working at reference desks will often have a second graduate degree in a specific subject discipline. \nIn Sri Lanka, librarians at reference desks typically have master's degrees from the Sri Lankan Library Association's accredited programs.\nElectronic reference services.\nWith the development of the Web, digital reference services are beginning to take over some of the roles of the traditional reference desk in a library. There is disagreement over whether or not this development is desirable or inevitable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17894", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17894", "title": "Leftist", "text": ""}
{"id": "17895", "revid": "6036800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17895", "title": "Leap year", "text": "Calendar year with a day (or month) added\nA leap year (also known as an intercalary year or bissextile year) is a calendar year that contains an additional day (or, in the case of a lunisolar calendar, a month) compared to a common year. The 366th day (or 13th month) is added to keep the calendar year synchronised with the astronomical year or seasonal year. Since astronomical events and seasons do not repeat in a whole number of days, calendars having a constant number of days each year will unavoidably drift over time with respect to the event that the year is supposed to track, such as seasons. By inserting (\"intercalating\") an additional day\u2014a leap day\u2014or month\u2014a leap month\u2014into some years, the drift between a civilisation's dating system and the physical properties of the Solar System can be corrected.\nAn astronomical year lasts slightly less than 365\u00a0days. The historic Julian calendar has three common years of 365\u00a0days followed by a leap year of 366\u00a0days, by extending February to 29\u00a0days rather than the common 28. The Gregorian calendar, the world's most widely used civil calendar, makes a further adjustment for the small error in the Julian algorithm; this extra leap day occurs in each year that is a multiple of 4, except for years evenly divisible by 100 but not by 400. Thus 1600, 2000 and 2400 are leap years, but not 1700, 1800, 1900, 2100, 2200, and 2300. \nIn the lunisolar Hebrew calendar, Adar Aleph, a 13th lunar month, is added seven times every 19\u00a0years to the twelve lunar months in its common years to keep its calendar year from drifting through the seasons. In the Solar Hijri and Bah\u00e1'\u00ed calendars, a leap day is added when needed to ensure that the following year begins on the March equinox.\nThe term \"leap year\" probably comes from the fact that a fixed date in the Gregorian calendar normally advances one day of the week from one year to the next, but the day of the week in the 12\u00a0months following the leap day (from 1March through 28February of the following year) will advance two\u00a0days due to the extra day, thus leaping over one\u00a0day in the week. For example, since 1March was a Friday in 2024, a Saturday in 2025, will be a Sunday in 2026, and a Monday in 2027, the date will then \"leap\" over Tuesday to fall on a Wednesday in 2028.\nThe length of a day is also occasionally corrected by inserting a leap second into Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) because of variations in Earth's rotation period. Unlike leap days, leap seconds are not introduced on a regular schedule because variations in the length of the day are not entirely predictable.\nLeap years can present a problem in computing, known as the leap year bug, when a year is not correctly identified as a leap year or when 29February is not handled correctly in logic that accepts or manipulates dates.\nJulian calendar.\nOn 1 January 45 BC, by edict, Julius Caesar reformed the historic Roman calendar to make it a consistent solar calendar (rather than one which was neither strictly lunar nor strictly solar), thus removing the need for frequent intercalary months. His rule for leap years was a simple one: add a leap day every 4\u00a0years. This algorithm is close to reality: a Julian year lasts 365.25days, a mean tropical year about 365.2422\u00a0days, a difference of only \u200a11 min. Consequently, even this Julian calendar drifts out of 'true' by about 3\u00a0days every 400\u00a0years. The Julian calendar continued in use unaltered for about 1600\u00a0years until the Catholic Church became concerned about the widening divergence between the March equinox and 21 March, as explained at Gregorian calendar, below.\nPrior to Caesar's creation of what would be the Julian calendar, February was already the shortest month of the year for Romans. In the Roman calendar (after the reform of Numa Pompilius that added January and February), all months except February had an odd number of days\u00a0\u2013 29 or 31. This was because of a Roman superstition that even numbers were unlucky. When Caesar changed the calendar to follow the solar year closely, he made all months have 30 or 31\u00a0days, leaving February unchanged except in leap years.\nGregorian calendar.\nIn the Gregorian calendar, the standard calendar in most of the world, almost every fourth year is a leap year. Each leap year, the month of February has 29 days instead of 28. Adding one extra day in the calendar every four years compensates for the fact that a period of 365 days is shorter than a tropical year by almost six hours. However, this correction is excessive and the Gregorian reform modified the Julian calendar's scheme of leap years as follows:\nEvery year that is exactly divisible by four is a leap year, except for years that are exactly divisible by 100, but these centurial years are leap years if they are exactly divisible by 400. For example, the years 1700, 1800, and 1900 are not leap years, but the years 1600 and 2000 are.\nWhereas the Julian calendar year incorrectly summarised Earth's tropical year as 365.25 days, the Gregorian calendar makes these exceptions to follow a calendar year of 365.2425 days. This more closely resembles a mean tropical year of 365.2422 days. Over a period of four centuries, the accumulated error of adding a leap day \"every\" four years amounts to about three extra days. The Gregorian calendar therefore omits three leap days every 400 years, which is the length of its \"leap cycle\". This is done by omitting 29 February in the three century years (multiples of 100) that are not multiples of 400. By this rule, an entire leap cycle is 400\u00a0years, which totals 146,097 days, and the average number of days per year is 365\u00a0+ &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444\u00a0\u2212 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044100\u00a0+ &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044400\u00a0= 365\u00a0+ &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;97\u2044400\u00a0= 365.2425. This rule could be applied to years before the Gregorian reform to create a proleptic Gregorian calendar, though the result would not match any historical records.\nThe Gregorian calendar was designed to keep the March equinox on or close to 21 March, so that the date of Easter (celebrated on the Sunday after the ecclesiastical full moon that falls on or after 21 March) remains close to the March equinox. The \"Accuracy\" section of the \"Gregorian calendar\" article discusses how well the Gregorian calendar achieves this objective, and how well it approximates the tropical year.\nLeap day in the Julian and Gregorian calendars.\nThe intercalary day that usually occurs every four\u00a0years is called leap day and is created by adding an extra day to February. This day is added to the calendar in leap years as a corrective measure because the Earth does not orbit the Sun in precisely 365\u00a0days. Since about the 15th century, this extra day has been 29 February, but when the Julian calendar was introduced, the leap day was handled differently in two respects. First, leap day fell within February and not at the end: 24 February was doubled to create, strangely to modern eyes, two days both dated 24 February. Second, the leap day was simply not counted so that a leap year still had 365\u00a0days.\nEarly Roman practice.\nThe early Roman calendar was a lunisolar one that consisted of 12\u00a0months, for a total of 355\u00a0days. In addition, a 27- or 28-day intercalary month, the , was sometimes inserted into February, at the first or second day after the (23 February), to resynchronise the lunar and solar cycles. The remaining days of Februarius were discarded. This intercalary month, named or , contained 27\u00a0days. The religious festivals that were normally celebrated in the last five\u00a0days of February were moved to the last five\u00a0days of Intercalaris. The lunisolar calendar was abandoned about 450\u00a0BC by the , who implemented the Roman Republican calendar, used until 46\u00a0BC. The days of these calendars were counted down (inclusively) to the next named day, so 24 February was [\"the sixth day before the calends of March\"] often abbreviated The Romans counted days inclusively in their calendars, so this was the fifth day before 1 March when counted in the modern exclusive manner (i.e., not including both the starting and ending day). Because only 22 or 23\u00a0days were effectively added, not a full lunation, the calends and ides of the Roman Republican calendar were no longer associated with the new moon and full moon.\nJulian reform.\nIn Caesar's revised calendar, there was just one intercalary day\u00a0\u2013 nowadays called the leap day\u00a0\u2013 to be inserted every fourth year, and this too was done after 23 February. To create the intercalary day, the existing (sixth day (inclusive: i.e., what we would call the fifth day before) before the (first day) of March, i.e., what we would call 24 February) was doubled, producing [a second sixth day before the \"Kalends\". This (\"twice sixth\") was rendered in later languages as \"bissextile\": the \"bissextile day\" is the leap day, and a \"bissextile year\" is a year which includes a leap day. This second instance of the sixth day before the Kalends of March was inserted in calendars between the \"normal\" fifth and sixth days. By legal fiction, the Romans treated both the first \"sixth day\" and the additional \"sixth day\" before the Kalends of March as one day. Thus a child born on either of those days in a leap year would have its first birthday on the following sixth day before the Kalends of March. In a leap year in the original Julian calendar, there were indeed two\u00a0days both numbered 24 February. This practice continued for another fifteen to seventeen centuries, even after most countries had adopted the Gregorian calendar.\nFor legal purposes, the two\u00a0days of the were considered to be a single day, with the second sixth being intercalated; but in common practice by the year 238, when Censorinus wrote, the intercalary day was followed by the last five\u00a0days of February, \"a.\" \"d.\" \"VI\", \"V\", \"IV\", \"III\", and (the days numbered 24, 25, 26, 27, and 28 from the beginning of February in a common year), so that the intercalated day was the \"first\" of the doubled pair. Thus the intercalated day was effectively inserted between the 23rd and 24th days of February. All later writers, including Macrobius about 430, Bede in 725, and other medieval computists (calculators of Easter), continued to state that the bissextum (bissextile day) occurred before the last five\u00a0days of February.\nIn England, the Church and civil society continued the Roman practice whereby the leap day was simply not counted, so that a leap year was only reckoned as 365\u00a0days. Henry III's 1236 instructed magistrates to treat the leap day and the day before as one day. The practical application of the rule is obscure. It was regarded as in force in the time of the famous lawyer Sir Edward Coke (1552\u20131634) because he cites it in his \"Institutes of the Lawes of England\". However, Coke merely quotes the Act with a short translation and does not give practical examples.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; ... and by (b) the statute , it is provided, , so as in computation that day excrescent is not accounted.\n29 February.\nReplacement (by 29 February) of the awkward practice of having two days with the same date appears to have evolved by custom and practice; the etymological origin of the term \"bissextile\" seems to have been lost. In England in the fifteenth century, \"29 February\" appears increasingly often in legal documents\u00a0\u2013 although the records of the proceedings of the House of Commons of England continued to use the old system until the middle of the sixteenth century. It was not until the passage of the Calendar (New Style) Act 1750 that 29 February was formally recognised in British law.\nLiturgical practices.\nIn the liturgical calendar of the Christian churches, the placement of the leap day is significant because of the date of the feast of Saint Matthias, which is defined as the sixth day before 1 March (counting inclusively). The Church of England's \"Book of Common Prayer\" was still using the \"two days with the same date\" system in its 1542 edition; it first included a calendar which used entirely consecutive day counting from 1662 and showed leap day as falling on 29 February. In the 1680s, the Church of England declared 25 February to be the feast of St Matthias.\nUntil 1970, the Roman Catholic Church always celebrated the feast of Saint Matthias on , so if the days were numbered from the beginning of the month, it was named 24 February in common years, but the presence of the in a bissextile year immediately before shifted the latter day to 25 February in leap years, with the Vigil of St. Matthias shifting from 23 February to the leap day of 24 February. This shift did not take place in pre-Reformation Norway and Iceland; Pope Alexander III ruled that either practice was lawful. Other feasts normally falling on 25\u201328 February in common years are also shifted to the following day in a leap year (although they would be on the same day according to the Roman notation). The practice is still observed by those who use the older calendars.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, the feast of St. John Cassian is celebrated on 29 February, but he is instead commemorated at Compline on 28 February in non-leap years. The feast of St. Matthias is celebrated in August, so leap years do not affect his commemoration, and, while the feast of the First and Second Findings of the Head of John the Baptist is celebrated on 24 February, the Orthodox church calculates days from the beginning of the current month, rather than counting down days to the Kalends of the following month, this is not affected. Thus, only the feast of St. John Cassian and any movable feasts associated with the Lenten or Pre-Lenten cycles are affected.\nFolk traditions.\nIn Ireland and Britain, it is a tradition that women may propose marriage only in leap years. While it has been claimed that the tradition was initiated by Saint Patrick or Brigid of Kildare in 5th century Ireland, this is dubious, as the tradition has not been attested before the 19th century. Supposedly, a 1288 law by Queen Margaret of Scotland (then age five and living in Norway), required that fines be levied if a marriage proposal was refused by the man; compensation was deemed to be a pair of leather gloves, a single rose, \u00a31, and a kiss. In some places the tradition was tightened to restricting female proposals to the modern leap day, 29 February, or to the medieval (bissextile) leap day, 24 February.\nAccording to Felten: \"A play from the turn of the 17th century, 'The Maydes Metamorphosis,' has it that 'this is leape year/women wear breeches.' A few hundred years later, breeches wouldn't do at all: Women looking to take advantage of their opportunity to pitch woo were expected to wear a scarlet petticoat\u00a0\u2013 fair warning, if you will.\"\nIn Finland, the tradition is that if a man refuses a woman's proposal on leap day, he should buy her the fabrics for a skirt.\nIn France, since 1980, a satirical newspaper titled \"La Bougie du Sapeur\" is published only on leap year, on 29 February.\nIn Greece, marriage in a leap year is considered unlucky. One in five engaged couples in Greece will plan to avoid getting married in a leap year.\nIn February 1988 the town of Anthony, Texas, declared itself the \"leap year capital of the world\", and an international leapling birthday club was started.\nBirthdays.\nA person born on 29 February may be called a \"leapling\" or a \"leaper\". In common years, they celebrate their birthdays on 28 February or 1 March.\nTechnically, a leapling will have fewer \"birthday anniversaries\" than their age in years. This phenomenon may be exploited for dramatic effect when a person is declared to be only a quarter of their actual age, by counting their leap-year birthday anniversaries only. For example, in Gilbert and Sullivan's 1879 comic opera \"The Pirates of Penzance\", Frederic (the pirate apprentice) discovers that he is bound to serve the pirates until his 21st \"birthday\" (that is, when he turns 88\u00a0years old, since 1900 was not a leap year) rather than until his 21st \"year\".\nFor legal purposes, legal birthdays depend on how local laws count time intervals.\nTaiwan.\nThe Civil Code of Taiwan since 10 October 1929, implies that the legal birthday of a leapling is 28 February in common years:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If a period fixed by weeks, months, and years does not commence from the beginning of a week, month, or year, it ends with the ending of the day which precedes the day of the last week, month, or year which corresponds to that on which it began to commence. But if there is no corresponding day in the last month, the period ends with the ending of the last day of the last month.\nHong Kong.\nSince 1990 non-retroactively, Hong Kong considers the legal birthday of a leapling 1 March in common years:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;# The time at which a person attains a particular age expressed in years shall be the commencement of the anniversary corresponding to the date of [their] birth.\nUK.\nIn the UK 1 March is considered to be a leapling's legal birthday.\nRevised Julian calendar.\nThe Revised Julian calendar adds an extra day to February in years that are multiples of four, except for years that are multiples of 100 that do not leave a remainder of 200 or 600 when divided by 900. This rule agrees with the rule for the Gregorian calendar until 2799. The first year that dates in the Revised Julian calendar will not agree with those in the Gregorian calendar will be 2800, because it will be a leap year in the Gregorian calendar but not in the Revised Julian calendar.\nThis rule gives an average year length of 365.242222\u00a0days. This is a very good approximation to the \"mean\" tropical year, but because the \"equinox\" year is slightly longer, the Revised Julian calendar, for the time being, does not do as good a job as the Gregorian calendar at keeping the March equinox on or close to 21 March.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed calendar.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed calendar is a solar calendar composed of 19 months of 19\u00a0days each (361\u00a0days). Years begin at Naw-R\u00faz, on the March equinox, on or about 21 March. A period of intercalary days, called Ayyam-i-Ha, is inserted before the 19th month. This period normally has four\u00a0days, but an extra day is added when needed to ensure that the following year starts on the March equinox. This is calculated and known years in advance.\nBengali, Indian and Thai calendars.\nThe Revised Bengali Calendar of Bangladesh and the Indian National Calendar organise their leap years so that every leap day is close to 29 February in the Gregorian calendar and vice versa. This makes it easy to convert dates to or from Gregorian.\nThe Thai solar calendar uses the Buddhist Era (BE) but has been synchronised with the Gregorian since AD\u00a01941.\nChinese calendar.\nThe Chinese calendar is lunisolar, so a leap year has an extra month, often called an \"embolismic\" month after the Greek word for it. In the Chinese calendar, the leap month is added according to a rule which ensures that month 11 is always the month that contains the northern winter solstice. The intercalary month takes the same number as the preceding month; for example, if it follows the second month (\u4e8c\u6708) then it is simply called \"leap second month\" i.e., .\nHebrew calendar.\nThe Hebrew calendar is lunisolar with an embolismic month. This extra month is called \"Adar Rishon\" (first Adar) and is added before \"Adar\", which then becomes \"Adar Sheini\" (second Adar). According to the Metonic cycle, this is done seven times every nineteen years (specifically, in years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19). This is to ensure that Passover () is always in the spring as required by the Torah (Pentateuch) in many verses relating to Passover.\nIn addition, the Hebrew calendar has postponement rules that postpone the start of the year by one or two\u00a0days. These postponement rules reduce the number of different combinations of year length and starting days of the week from 28 to 14, and regulate the location of certain religious holidays in relation to the Sabbath. In particular, the first day of the Hebrew year can never be Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday. This rule is known in Hebrew as \"\" (), i.e., \"Rosh [ha-Shanah, first day of the year] is not Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday\" (as the Hebrew word is written by three Hebrew letters signifying Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday). Accordingly, the first day of Passover is never Monday, Wednesday, or Friday. This rule is known in Hebrew as \"\" (), which has a double meaning\u00a0\u2014 \"Passover is not a legend\", but also \"Passover is not Monday, Wednesday, or Friday\" (as the Hebrew word is written by three Hebrew letters signifying Monday, Wednesday, and Friday).\nOne reason for this rule is that Yom Kippur, the holiest day in the Hebrew calendar and the tenth day of the Hebrew year, now must never be adjacent to the weekly Sabbath (which is Saturday), i.e., it must never fall on Friday or Sunday, in order not to have two adjacent Sabbath days. However, Yom Kippur can still be on Saturday. A second reason is that Hoshana Rabbah, the 21st day of the Hebrew year, will never be on Saturday. These rules for the Feasts do not apply to the years from the Creation to the deliverance of the Hebrews from Egypt under Moses. It was at that time (cf.\u00a0Exodus 13) that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob gave the Hebrews their \"Law\" including the days to be kept holy and the feast days and Sabbaths.\nYears consisting of 12\u00a0months have between 353 and 355\u00a0days. In a (\"in order\") 354-day year, months have alternating 30 and 29\u00a0day lengths. In a (\"lacking\") year, the month of Kislev is reduced to 29\u00a0days. In a (\"filled\") year, the month of Marcheshvan is increased to 30\u00a0days. 13-month years follow the same pattern, with the addition of the 30-day Adar Alef, giving them between 383 and 385\u00a0days.\nIslamic calendars.\nThe observed and calculated versions of the lunar Islamic calendar do not have regular leap days, even though both have lunar months containing 29 or 30\u00a0days, generally in alternating order. However, the tabular Islamic calendar used by Islamic astronomers during the Middle Ages and still used by some Muslims does have a regular leap day added to the last month of the lunar year in 11\u00a0years of a 30-year cycle. This additional day is found at the end of the last month, Dhu al-Hijjah, which is also the month of the Hajj.\nThe Solar Hijri calendar is the modern Iranian calendar. It is an observational calendar that starts on the March equinox and adds a single intercalated day to the last month (Esfand) once every four or five\u00a0years; the first leap year occurs as the fifth year of the typical 33-year cycle and the remaining leap years occur every four\u00a0years through the remainder of the 33-year cycle. This system has less periodic deviation or jitter from its mean year than the Gregorian calendar and operates on the simple rule that New Year's Day must fall in the 24\u00a0hours of the March equinox. The 33-year period is not completely regular; every so often the 33-year cycle will be broken by a cycle of 29\u00a0years.\nThe Hijri-Shamsi calendar, also adopted by the Ahmadiyya Community, is based on solar calculations and is similar to the Gregorian calendar in its structure with the exception that its epoch is the Hijra.\nCoptic and Ethiopian calendars.\nThe Coptic calendar has 13\u00a0months, 12 of 30\u00a0days each, and one at the end of the year of 5\u00a0days, or 6\u00a0days in leap years. The Coptic Leap Year follows the same rules as the Julian Calendar so that the extra month always has 6\u00a0days in the year before a Julian Leap Year. The Ethiopian calendar has 12\u00a0months of 30\u00a0days plus 5 or 6 epagomenal days, which comprise a 13th month.\nAncient Egyptian calendar.\nAncient Egypt used a fixed civil year of 365 days, made of 12 months of 30 days plus five epagomenal days, with no leap day; the calendar drifted by about one day every four years relative to the solar year.\nIn 238 BC, a synod of priests issued the Canopus Decree, proposing to add one extra day every four years to stabilise the seasons, inserted after the five epagomenal days before New Year. The reform is generally considered not to have been implemented in Ptolemaic Egypt.\nUnder Roman rule, Egypt adopted a reformed Alexandrian calendar equivalent in structure to the Julian rule, i.e., a 365-day year with an extra (sixth) epagomenal day every fourth year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17897", "revid": "17859592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17897", "title": "Ludwig Mies van der Rohe", "text": "German-American architect (1886\u20131969)\nLudwig Mies van der Rohe ( ; ; born Maria Ludwig Michael Mies; March 27, 1886\u00a0\u2013 August 17, 1969) was a German and American architect, academic, and interior designer. He was commonly referred to as Mies, his surname. He is regarded as one of the pioneers of modern architecture.\nIn the 1930s, Mies was the last director of the Bauhaus, a ground-breaking school of modernist art, design and architecture in Germany. After Nazism's rise to power, due to its strong opposition to modernism, he emigrated to the United States in 1937 or 1938. He accepted the position to head the architecture school at what is today the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT).\nMies sought to establish his own particular architectural style that could represent modern times. His buildings made use of modern materials such as industrial steel and plate glass to define interior spaces. He is often associated with his fondness for the aphorisms \"less is more\" and \"God is in the details\".\nEarly career.\nMies was born March 27, 1886, in Aachen, Germany. He worked in his father's stone carving shop and at several local design firms before he moved to Berlin, where he joined the office of interior designer Bruno Paul. He began his architectural career as an apprentice at the studio of Peter Behrens from 1908 to 1912, where he was exposed to the current design theories and to progressive German culture. He worked alongside Le Corbusier and Walter Gropius, who was later also involved in the development of the Bauhaus. Mies served as construction manager of the Embassy of the German Empire in Saint Petersburg under Behrens.\nLudwig Mies renamed himself as part of his transformation from a tradesman's son to an architect working with Berlin's cultural elite, adding \"van der\" and his mother's maiden name \"Rohe\" and using the Dutch \"van der\", because the German form \"von\" was a nobiliary particle legally restricted to those of German nobility lineage. He began his independent professional career designing upper-class homes.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1913 Mies married Adele Auguste (Ada) Bruhn (1885\u20131951), the daughter of a wealthy industrialist. The couple separated in 1918, after having three daughters: Dorothea (1914\u20132008), an actress and dancer who was known as Georgia, Marianne (1915\u20132003), and Waltraut (1917\u20131959), who was a research scholar and curator at the Art Institute of Chicago. During his military service in 1917, Mies fathered a son out of wedlock.\nIn 1925, Mies began a relationship with designer Lilly Reich that ended when he moved to the United States; from 1940 until his death, artist Lora Marx (1900\u20131989) was his primary companion. Mies carried on a romantic relationship with sculptor and art collector Mary Callery for whom he designed an artist's studio in Huntington, Long Island, New York. He had a brief romantic relationship with Nelly van Doesburg. After having met in Europe many years prior, they met again in New York in 1947 during a dinner with Josep Llu\u00eds Sert where he promised her he would help organize an exhibition in Chicago featuring the work of her late husband Theo van Doesburg. This exhibition took place from October 15 until November 8, 1947, with their romance officially ending not much later. Nevertheless they remained on good terms, spending Easter together in 1948 at a modern farmhouse renovated by Mies on Long Island, as well as meeting several more times that year.\nTransition from traditionalism to Modernism.\nAfter World War I, while still designing traditional neoclassical homes, Mies began a parallel experimental effort. He joined his avant-garde peers in the long-running search for a new style that would be suitable for the modern industrial age. The weak points of traditional styles had been under attack by progressive theorists since the mid-nineteenth century, primarily for the contradictions of hiding modern construction technology with a facade of ornamented traditional styles.\nThe mounting criticism of the historical styles gained substantial cultural credibility after World War I, a disaster widely seen as a failure of the old world order of imperial leadership of Europe. The aristocratic classical revival styles were particularly reviled by many as the architectural symbol of a now-discredited and outmoded social system. Progressive thinkers called for a completely new architectural design process guided by rational problem-solving and an exterior expression of modern materials and structure rather than what they considered the superficial application of classical facades.\nWhile continuing his traditional neoclassical design practice, Mies began to develop visionary projects that, though mostly unbuilt, rocketed him to fame as an architect capable of giving form that was in harmony with the spirit of the emerging modern society. Boldly abandoning ornament altogether, Mies made a dramatic modernist debut in 1921 with his stunning competition proposal for the faceted all-glass Friedrichstra\u00dfe skyscraper, followed by a taller curved version in 1922 named the Glass Skyscraper.\nHe constructed his first modernist house with the Villa Wolf in 1926 in Guben (today Gubin, Poland) for Erich and Elisabeth Wolf. This was shortly followed by Haus Lange and Haus Esters in 1928.\nHe continued with a series of pioneering projects, culminating in his two European masterworks: the temporary German Pavilion for the Barcelona exposition (often called the Barcelona Pavilion) in 1929 (a 1986 reconstruction is now built on the original site) and the elegant Villa Tugendhat in Brno, Czechoslovakia, completed in 1930.\nHe joined the German avant-garde, working with the progressive design magazine \"G\", which started in July 1923. He developed prominence as architectural director of the Werkbund, organizing the influential Weissenhof Estate prototype modernist housing exhibition. He was also one of the founders of the architectural association Der Ring. He joined the avant-garde Bauhaus design school as their director of architecture, adopting and developing their functionalist application of simple geometric forms in the design of useful objects. He served as its last director.\nLike many other avant-garde architects of the day, Mies based his architectural mission and principles on his understanding and interpretation of ideas developed by theorists and critics who pondered the declining relevance of the traditional design styles. He selectively adopted theoretical ideas such as the aesthetic credos of Russian Constructivism with their ideology of \"efficient\" sculptural assembly of modern industrial materials. Mies found appeal in the use of simple rectilinear and planar forms, clean lines, pure use of color, and the extension of space around and beyond interior walls expounded by the Dutch De Stijl group. In particular, the layering of functional sub-spaces within an overall space and the distinct articulation of parts as expressed by Gerrit Rietveld appealed to Mies.\nAs households in the middle class and upper class could increasingly afford household appliances, modern architects like Mies, Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius and Adolf Loos rejected decorative architecture and became drivers of a modern Arts and Crafts movement in Europe.\nMies and Le Corbusier later acknowledged the lasting impact Frank Lloyd Wright's \"Wasmuth Portfolio\" had after it was exhibited in Berlin.\nEmigration to the United States.\nMies's first US commission was the interior of Philip Johnson's New York apartment, in 1930.\nStarting in 1930, Mies served as the last director of the faltering Bauhaus, at the request of his colleague and competitor Gropius. In 1932, the Nazis forced the state-sponsored school to leave its campus in Dessau and Mies moved it to an abandoned telephone factory in Berlin. In April 1933, the school was raided by the Gestapo and in July of that year, because the Nazis had made the continued operation of the school untenable, Mies and the faculty \"voted\" to close the Bauhaus.\nSome of Mies's designs found favour with Adolf Hitler, such as his designs for autobahn service stations. Mies and Gropius both joined the visual arts section of the Reich Culture Chamber and entered early Nazi architectural competitions, with designs showing structures decorated with swastikas. Mies's design for a Reich Bank building in Berlin was one of six to receive a prize, although it was rejected by Hitler. Mies and Gropius wanted to be accepted by the Nazis and both signed an artists' manifesto supporting Hitler's succession to Hindenburg. Mies's Modernist designs of glass and steel were not considered suitable for state buildings by the Nazis and in 1937 or 1938 he reluctantly followed Gropius to the United States.\nHe accepted a residential commission in Wyoming and then an offer to head the department of architecture of the Armour Institute of Technology in Chicago. Mies was allowed to combine ideological conviction with commerce. Already in 1919 he had drawn up plans for an office glass tower. In New York he found investors for the Seagram Building, which was completed in 1958.\nCareer in the United States.\nAfter being hired at the Armour Institute of Technology, Mies settled in Chicago, Illinois. When the Armour Institute merged with the Lewis Institute to form the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) in 1940, Mies remained on IIT's faculty to head its architecture department. He was hired to design the Illinois Institute of Technology Academic Campus's new buildings and master plan. All his buildings still stand there, including Alumni Hall, the Carr Memorial Chapel, and his masterpiece the S.R. Crown Hall, built as the home of IIT's School of Architecture.\nIn 1944, he became an American citizen, completing his severance from his native Germany. His thirty years as an American architect reflect a more structural, pure approach toward achieving his goal of a new architecture for the twentieth century. He focused his efforts on enclosing open and adaptable \"universal\" spaces with clearly arranged structural frameworks, featuring prefabricated steel shapes filled in with large sheets of glass.\nHis early projects at the IIT campus, and for developer Herbert Greenwald, presented to Americans a style that seemed a natural progression of the almost forgotten nineteenth century Chicago School style. His architecture, with origins in the German Bauhaus and western European International Style, became an accepted mode of building for American cultural and educational institutions, developers, public agencies, and large corporations.\nNotable buildings.\nChicago Federal Complex.\nChicago Federal Center Plaza, also known as Chicago Federal Plaza, unified three buildings of varying scales: the mid-rise Everett McKinley Dirksen United States Courthouse, the high-rise John C. Kluczynski Building, and the single-story Post Office building. The complex's plot area extends over two blocks; a one-block site, bounded by Jackson, Clark, Adams, and Dearborn streets, contains the Kluczynski Federal Building and U.S. Post Office Loop Station, while a parcel on an adjacent block to the east contains the Dirksen U.S. Courthouse. The structural framing of the buildings is formed of high-tensile bolted steel and concrete. The exterior curtain walls are defined by projecting steel I-beam mullions covered with flat black graphite paint, characteristic of Mies's designs. The balance of the curtain walls are of bronze-tinted glass panes, framed in shiny aluminum, and separated by steel spandrels, also covered with flat black graphite paint. The entire complex is organized on a 28-foot grid pattern subdivided into six 4-foot, 8-inch modules. This pattern extends from the granite-paved plaza into the ground-floor lobbies of the two tower buildings with the grid lines continuing vertically up the buildings and integrating each component of the complex. Associated architects that have played a role in the complex's long history from 1959 to 1974 include Schmidt, Garden &amp; Erickson; C.F. Murphy Associates; and A. Epstein &amp; Sons.\nEdith Farnsworth House.\nBetween 1946 and 1951, Mies van der Rohe designed and built the Edith Farnsworth House, a weekend retreat outside Chicago for an independent professional woman, Dr. Edith Farnsworth. Here, Mies explored the relationship between people, shelter, and nature. The glass pavilion is raised six feet above a floodplain next to the Fox River, surrounded by forest and rural prairies.\nThe house took a while to be built due to the underlying issues between Mies and Edith Farnsworth. There was a complex relationship between the two for a variety of reasons, some related to personal feelings and others to design considerations. Back and forth legal disputes led to these ongoing issues despite the beautiful outcome of the design.\nThe highly crafted pristine white structural frame and all-glass walls define a simple rectilinear interior space, allowing nature and light to envelop the interior space. A wood-paneled fireplace (also housing mechanical equipment, kitchen, and toilets) is positioned within the open space to suggest living, dining and sleeping spaces without using walls. No partitions touch the surrounding all-glass enclosure. Without solid exterior walls, full-height draperies on a perimeter track allow freedom to provide full or partial privacy when and where desired. The house has been described as sublime, a temple hovering between heaven and earth, a poem, a work of art.\nThe Edith Farnsworth House and its wooded site was purchased at auction for US$7.5\u00a0million by preservation groups in 2004 and is now owned and operated by the National Trust for Historic Preservation as a public museum. The building influenced the creation of hundreds of modernist glass houses, most notably the Glass House by Philip Johnson, located near New York City and also now owned by the National Trust.\n860\u2013880 Lake Shore Drive.\nThe 860\u2013880 Lake Shore Drive Apartments were built between 1948 and 1951 and came to define postwar US Modernism. These towers, with fa\u00e7ades of steel and glass, were radical departures from the typical residential brick apartment buildings.\nMies designed a series of four middle-income high-rise apartment buildings for developer Herbert Greenwald. The towers were simple rectangular boxes with a non-hierarchical wall enclosure, raised on stilts above a glass-enclosed lobby. The lobby is set back from the perimeter columns, which were exposed around the perimeter of the building above, creating a modern colonnade. This configuration created a feeling of light, openness, and freedom of movement at the ground level that became the prototype for countless new high rises designed both by Mies's office and his followers.\nSeagram Building.\nAlthough now acclaimed and widely influential as an urban design feature, Mies had to convince Seagram officials that a taller tower with significant \"unused\" open space at ground level would enhance the presence and prestige of the building. Mies's design included a bronze curtain wall with external H-shaped mullions that were exaggerated in depth beyond what was structurally necessary. Detractors criticized it as having committed Adolf Loos's \"crime of ornamentation\". Philip Johnson had a role in interior materials selections, and he designed the sumptuous Four Seasons Restaurant. The Seagram Building is said to be an early example of the innovative \"fast-track\" construction process, where design documentation and construction are done concurrently.\nMcCormick House.\nDuring 1951\u20131952, Mies designed the steel, glass, and brick McCormick House, located in Elmhurst, Illinois (18 miles west of the Chicago Loop), for real-estate developer Robert Hall McCormick, Jr. A one-story adaptation of the exterior curtain wall of his famous 860\u2013880 Lake Shore Drive towers, it served as a prototype for an unbuilt series of speculative houses to be constructed in Melrose Park, Illinois. The house has since been relocated and reconfigured as a part of the Elmhurst Art Museum.\nMuseum of Fine Arts, Houston.\nMies designed two buildings for the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston (MFAH) as additions to the Caroline Wiess Law Building. In 1953, the MFAH commissioned Mies van der Rohe to create a master plan for the institution. He designed two additions to the building\u2014Cullinan Hall, completed in 1958, and the Brown Pavilion, completed in 1974. A renowned example of the International Style, these portions of the Caroline Wiess Law Building comprise one of only two Mies-designed museums in the world.\nTwo buildings in Baltimore, MD.\nThe One Charles Center, built in 1962, is a 23-story aluminum and glass building that heralded the beginning of Baltimore's downtown modern buildings. The Highfield House, just to the northeast of the Johns Hopkins Homewood campus, was built in 1964 as a rental apartment building. The 15-story concrete tower became a residential condominium building in 1979. Both buildings are now on the National Register of Historic Places.\nNational Gallery, Berlin.\nMies's last work was the Neue Nationalgalerie art museum, the New National Gallery for the Berlin National Gallery. Considered one of the most perfect statements of his architectural approach, the upper pavilion is a precise composition of monumental steel columns and a cantilevered (overhanging) roof plane with a glass enclosure. The simple square glass pavilion is a powerful expression of his ideas about flexible interior space, defined by transparent walls and supported by an external structural frame.\nMies Building at Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana.\nIn 1952, a fraternity commissioned Mies to design a building on the Indiana University campus in Bloomington, Indiana. The plan was not realized during his lifetime, but the design was rediscovered in 2013, and in 2019 the university's Eskenazi School of Art, Architecture + Design announced they would be constructing it with blessing of his grandchildren. As of June 2022, the building is completed and open.\nMartin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library.\nMies designed Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library in Washington, DC. The building was completed in 1972 at a cost of $18 million and three years after Mies's death. It is the central facility of the District of Columbia Public Library (DCPL), and is his only realized library and his only building in Washington D.C.\nFurniture.\nMies, often in collaboration with Lilly Reich, designed modern furniture pieces using new industrial technologies that have become popular classics, such as the Barcelona chair and table, the Brno chair, and the Tugendhat chair. These pieces are manufactured under licence by the Knoll furniture company.\nHis furniture is known for fine craftsmanship, a mixture of traditional luxurious fabrics like leather combined with modern chrome frames, and a distinct separation of the supporting structure and the supported surfaces, often employing cantilevers to enhance the feeling of lightness created by delicate structural frames.\nEducator.\nIn 1953 the \"House Beautiful\" editor Elizabeth Gordon published an editorial under the title \"The Threat to the Next America\". In it, she criticized Mies's Villa Tugendhat as cold, barren design and dismissed Mies as European Architect.\nMies served as the last director of Bauhaus, and then headed the department of architecture, Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, where he developed the Second Chicago School. He played a significant role as an educator, believing his architectural language could be learned, then applied to design any type of modern building. He set up a new education at the department of architecture of the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, replacing the traditional Ecole des Beaux-Art curriculum with a three-step-education beginning with crafts of drawing and construction leading to planning skills and finishing with theory of architecture. He worked personally and intensively on prototype solutions, and then allowed his students, both in school and his office, to develop derivative solutions for specific projects under his guidance.\nMies placed great importance on education of architects who could carry on his design principles. He devoted a great deal of time and effort leading the architecture program at Illinois Institute of Technology. \nMies served on the initial Advisory Board of the Graham Foundation in Chicago. His own work as architect focused on intensive personal involvement in design efforts to create prototype solutions for building types.\nDeath and legacy.\nIn 1961, a program at Columbia University's School of Architecture celebrated the four great founders of contemporary architecture: Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Frank Lloyd Wright. It included addresses by Le Corbusier and Gropius as well as an interview with Mies van der Rohe. Discussion focused upon philosophies of design, aspects of their various architectural projects, and the juncture of architecture and city planning. In 1963, van der Rohe was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\nTechnological advances in the manufacturing of architectural glass generated renewed interest in Mies's 1922 designs for a high-rise block on Friedrichstrasse in Berlin. Mies's Farnsworth House in Plano Illinois became a recurrent theme in 20th century architecture because it resembled a glass house. Technological limits meant that Mies's vision for a \"skin and bones\" architecture, where the steel frame was exposed internally and externally could never be fully realized. Mies also inspired the minimalism movement which fused Japanese architecture with Zen gardens.\nMies van der Rohe died on August 17, 1969, from esophageal cancer caused by his smoking habit. After cremation, his ashes were buried near Chicago's other famous architects in Chicago's Graceland Cemetery. His grave is marked by an intentionally unadorned, clean-line black slab of polished granite.\nWhile Mies van der Rohe's work had enormous influence and critical recognition, his approach failed to sustain a creative force as a style after his death. In 1966 Robert Venturi coined the post-modern motto \"less is a bore\" as countervision to Mies's motto \"less is more\". By the 1980s, Mies' style was eclipsed by a new wave of modernism and post-modernism. This new style of architecture is evident in the buildings designed by Kevin Roche, one of Mies' students at IIT in Chicago.\nArchives.\nThe Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Archive, an administratively independent section of the Museum of Modern Art's department of architecture and design, was established in 1968 by the museum's trustees. It was founded in response to the architect's desire to bequeath his entire work to the museum. The archive consists of about nineteen thousand drawings and prints, one thousand of which are by the designer and architect Lilly Reich (1885\u20131947), Mies van der Rohe's close collaborator from 1927 to 1937; of written documents (primarily, the business correspondence) covering nearly the entire career of the architect; of photographs of buildings, models, and furniture; and of audiotapes, books, and periodicals.\nArchival materials are also held by the Ryerson &amp; Burnham Libraries at the Art Institute of Chicago. The Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Collection, 1929\u20131969 (bulk 1948\u20131960) includes correspondence, articles, and materials related to his association with the Illinois Institute of Technology. The Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Metropolitan Structures Collection, 1961\u20131969, includes scrapbooks and photographs documenting Chicago projects.\nOther archives are held at the University of Illinois at Chicago (personal book collection), the Canadian Centre for Architecture (drawings and photos) in Montreal, the Newberry Library in Chicago (personal correspondence), and at the Library of Congress in Washington D.C. (professional correspondence).\nTributes.\nThere is a street named after him in his birth town of Aachen known as Mies-van-der Rohe-Stra\u00dfe. \nMies van der Rohe was a partial inspiration for the character of L\u00e1szl\u00f3 T\u00f3th in Brady Corbet's film \"The Brutalist\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17898", "revid": "723154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17898", "title": "Laundering", "text": "Laundering may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17899", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17899", "title": "Lodovico Ariosto", "text": ""}
